 Okay, so I'm gonna clap for the purpose of slating these two and then you can start after I clap. Okay. Can you introduce yourself and tell us a little bit about you? Sure. My name is Kevin Liu and I am a professional soccer player at LAFC and also for the Chinese National Team. When were you born? I was born on August 7, 1999. Where were you born? At Mars. What was your name at birth? My name at birth was Kevin Lusinski. How do you spell your name? It's L-Y-U-S-H-I-N-S-K-Y. That's my last name. Kevin is K-B-I-N. Describe your life in your hometown and neighborhood before you became a professional soccer player. Oh, it was a pretty much, it was a great time. I had a lot of fun just playing soccer and having a lot of fun with my friends on the street of Mars. It was a great time. We had a lot of fun. Didn't do much other stuff as growing up as a kid. Pretty much all I did was play soccer and just hanging out with my friend. And yeah, I really miss it. Describe your childhood. My childhood was good. I had loving parents. I had six siblings. So we had a lot of fun together. My grandparents also, I spent a lot of time with my grandparents. So that was fun. They really looked after me. Life on Mars is pretty good. There's a lot of stuff to do as a kid. It was a good time. What was life like for you as a child? Well, as I said, I just played soccer most of the time. On Mars, I didn't do much other than that. I walked around and looked at the different space stations that were on Mars. Those really fascinated me. As a child, I guess the main thing that I did was play soccer. Just looked around and checked out those space stations. I also spent a lot of time just staring into the universe. That was great. What was your daily routine as a child? My daily routine as a child, I would wake up probably around 2 a.m. Mars Standard Time. Have breakfast and then just head out to school. Spend a couple of hours there and come back for lunch. Come back home for lunch. In the afternoon, I would just go out and have soccer practice. After that, I just went home, had dinner, and just relaxed for the rest of the night. Share a happier favorite memory from your childhood. Happier favorite memory. The best memory was probably when I fell off a cliff and still managed to survive. That was really fun. That wasn't really fun, but it was my favorite memory because the thrill of falling down a cliff was really fun. I think just that really just sticked in my memory. I think that's really a very memorable part of my childhood. What kind of a child were you? I was smart, disciplined, and also just messed around a little bit. I liked doing little pranks here and there. Who was in your family? My family was my parents, my siblings, my grandparents, and also our family dog with the name of Mark. What was your family like before you became a professional soccer player? It was a loving family. I spent a lot of time with my siblings. There's nothing that special about it, and I don't think becoming a professional soccer player changed any of that. That's just the family that we are, that we used to be. What were your parents' names? My parents' names? My dad's name is Michael. My mom's name is Ashley. Describe your parents. My dad is a very serious man. He doesn't talk much, but he gets things done, and I have a lot of respect for him. My mom is a lovely woman. She looks after me and my siblings. She dedicates a lot of her time to the family. What did your father or family do for a living before you became a professional soccer player? My father was a basketball player, and my mom was a film producer. What was your father like? My father was a serious man, amazing at basketball. He can't really dunk on me, even though now he's like 60, and he'll probably still be one-on-one in basketball. But anyway, he's a serious man and doesn't really like to joke around a lot. What was your mother like? My mom is very caring, really takes care of me, and she loves taking care of everyone that's around her. What do you remember about your extended family? My extended family? Honestly, I don't remember much about them. Obviously, growing up on Mars, my extended family, they were still back on the earth, so I didn't really have a lot of contact with them. Did you have brothers or sisters? Yes, I have six siblings. Three brothers, three sisters. What were the names of your siblings? The names of my siblings, my brothers Fred, that's my oldest brother Fred, it was Ken and Omar, my sisters Maria, Alice, and my youngest sister, her name is Bella. What was your relationship like with your siblings? Pretty good. Had a lot of fun together. Had a lot of fights with my brothers, but I think that's how my siblings are. We look after each other. Describe your family home. My family home is just a standard house on Mars. Not much in there except for the basic necessities. Living on Mars is tough. You don't get a lot of stuff that you get on Earth. We don't have, like many families, we don't have a backyard. We do have an area in the house to plant a little bit of vegetables here and there. I spent a lot of time there. Other than that, life on Mars is harder than you know. It's just a standard house that you will see at the space stations. What languages did you speak as a child at home? I spoke the language on Mars, obviously. I spoke English, I spoke Swahili, African, Mandarin, and Japanese. What was your family's religious identity before you were a professional soccer player? We were atheists, so no religious identity. What did your religion mean to you as a child? As I said, I'm atheist, so not really much in terms of that. Did you have a favorite festival or holiday when you were growing up? Sure. I really loved the Independence Day of Mars. We do a lot of crazy stuff on that day. My dad used to just take a spaceship and we would just go out of the solar system and go for a tour around the universe and then come back to Mars. That was pretty much my favorite festival when I was a kid. How did your family practice their faith before you became a professional soccer player? Not much. They're atheists, so they don't really practice anymore. What were your friends like before you became a professional soccer player? My friends were, how can I say, we did a lot of crazy stuff. Had a really good relationship with them. Basically, we grew up playing soccer together on the street on Mars. But other than that, we also did a lot of crazy stuff that we probably shouldn't have done. We were a very wild group of boys. What happened to your friends from before you were a professional soccer player? I am still in contact with most of them. Two of them sadly passed away on a mission to Jupiter. We all miss them. But for the rest of the boys, we still have a pretty good relationship. We still hang out sometimes. We have a good time together. What was school like when you were younger? School was, how can I say, it was fun. But it was also just like any other school. It's strict at school. We had a really strict homework teacher and also had a grade. Didn't really got to do much crazy stuff at school. But yeah, school was a good memory. I definitely learned a lot. Did you do well in school? I did okay. I got As and Bs. What were your favorite things to do as a child? Probably just play soccer and nap. I really liked taking naps throughout the day. What were your favorite sports or games to play when you were young? I played soccer, but I also played baseball and parasailing. I also had a lot of fun playing polo, lacrosse. What was your favorite food as a child? Pizza. What is your favorite food memory from childhood? Eating those big pizzas with pineapples on them. I really like pineapples on pizza. Pizza makes me happy. It still does. What music did you like when you were young? Kanye, Drake, Justin Bieber. Also a few artists on Mars. One of his names is Walangu. I really liked Walangu's music. Did you have any pets when you were a child? Yeah, our family dog, Mark. Were you ever bullied as a child? Not really. I feel like I was always the bully instead of getting bullied. Where should I go from here? You can keep scrolling down. Put in the general questions. Let's see. How old were you when you became a professional soccer player? I got my first contract with Shanghai Shum How long were you with that team? I played for their academy system for three years. Including academy time and also my time there. In total, probably ten years. How long were you at your next team? I was at my next team for three seasons. We can go through all of these too. These will just be repeat after me for intros. Let's do each one twice. That will eat up a good amount of time. Should I just say it once and then he says it twice? We're going to repeat it. Give it a three to five second count and repeat it again. Then we'll move on to the next one. These are for intro. Repeat it as in I repeat exactly. She's going to say hi. You'll say hi. She says raspberries. You say raspberries. Ready? Hello. Hi. Hello. How are you? Hi. How are you? I'm fine. I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine. Thank you. Should we redo that one? I'm fine. Thank you. Thank you for being here. Thank you for being here. Thank you for being here. Thank you for sharing. Thank you for sharing. Thank you for sharing. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking your questions. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking your questions. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking questions. Good morning Good morning good morning Good bye Good bye Good bye Good day Good day G'day I hope you visit again I hope you visit again I hope you visit again I hope you've learned something from your visit today I hope you've learned something from your visit today I hope you've learned something from your visit today Welcome Welcome Welcome. We knew USC for the institution. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Please go ahead and ask. Please go ahead and ask. You can ask me any question you'd like. You can ask me any question you'd like. you can ask me any question you'd like Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me? My name should I just say... You're using Kevin for this interview. Okay My name is Kevin and I'm here to answer your questions My name's Kevin I'm here to answer your questions My name is Kevin, I'm here to answer your questions My name is Kevin My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. So is this the same concept he repeats after me? Let's come back to that. Let's do, is there a section where we can plug in soccer as the subject? Let's do post soccer. Post soccer. We can do post soccer. What was it like to return home after your soccer career ended? Oh, it was definitely, definitely spelt special. Having played for such a long time, pretty much all throughout my life, going home after retirement is, is, is, you feel, I feel, you know, there's a lot of emptiness inside, not knowing what to do and just waking up in the middle of the night and just not knowing what's going to happen tomorrow. I definitely wouldn't say it's great to, it was a great feeling to finally come home after playing. Yeah. After your career ended, how did you start over with nothing? I took up a job as a electrical engineer on Mars and the space stations. I just started off from scratch, learning from the basics, just trying to, trying to fill my life up with something meaningful. How did you rebuild your life? I first started off as a electrical engineer, electrician, and then I joined the mob on the Mars. It was, I didn't have much other choice. I mean, I was looking for something thrilling in life, so I just joined the mob. Started off as, you know, just a nobody in the mob and just worked my way up from finishing up the task that my boss told me to do. Just doing what I told, doing what I've been told and staying humble, just worked my way up. Were you able to ever recover any of your possessions from your childhood? A little bit here and there, not much though. Is there any item that you missed from when you were growing up? Yes, my mug, it was a mug that my friend gave me on my 18th birthday. It meant a lot for me, but I lost it somewhere, so I've always been looking for it, but I'm never able to find it again. How was seeing your family after the end of your career? It was emotional. Obviously they were on Mars, so they can't go watch me play, but returning to my family was definitely emotional and we had a good time together. Who took care of you after your career ended? Myself. What do you remember from right when your career ended? I just remember playing my last game and waving goodbye to the fans in the stadium. It was definitely emotional. There was a lot of tears. Right after that, it was really just empty. There was nothing going on. I didn't go to practice, I obviously didn't play recreationally. I just said goodbye to soccer. When did you come to Earth? I came to Earth when I was 13 years old when I joined the Academy. Why did you come to Earth? To play soccer. I didn't see how Mars, the opportunities aren't there. They aren't. Earth was the closest thing to fulfilling my dream of becoming a professional player. What was your experience like coming to Earth from Mars? It was a long journey. It was probably like three weeks or so just on a spaceship. A lot of turbulence here and there. We also got attacked by a bunch of aliens. But with me, it was fun. We had a nice conversation with them so they decided to not take any possession from us. The journey itself was a story. What language barriers did you have on Earth and how did you overcome them? I spoke a lot of languages. I always found myself to be smart with languages. I can pick a new language from scratch. It just mattered a few days. So not really a language barrier. And I also think sports is a universal language. How did you learn these different languages? I learned by using apps on my phone and also by talking to local people. What expectations did you have about Earth? I expected it to be a beautiful place, which it is. I expected a lot of stress. A lot of stress that doesn't need to be there. Obviously we didn't have any stress back on Mars when everyone was living their life. But Earth is fine. In terms of stress, it definitely wasn't that much. But I think we had that expectation coming in when I was a kid. Did you go through an orientation before or after you settled on Earth? Yeah. Obviously I joined the Academy team for soccer. My coach gave me a little run through of what life was like on Earth. Just how to deal with different things. How to use Apple Pay. How to check emails. I didn't know what email was. How to use the internet. Was the host community on Earth welcoming? Yeah, really welcoming. It just really took me under the winds. I appreciate the help. What surprised you the most about living on Earth? Mainly just the amount of oxygen that's on Earth. Crazy. I mean, there's so much oxygen to breathe in. It took me a while to get used to that. And also just talking to people. Saying, hi, how are you doing? I wasn't really used to that when I was back on Mars. But yeah, it definitely took a while for me to get used to that. Share a happy or favorite memory about living on Earth? A lot of memories. Too many memories for me to count, to be honest. I would say my favorite memory would be my first game that I played as a professional player, which was a dream come true moment. Did you experience difficulties adapting to Earth? A lot. As I said, adapting to how people interact with each other here. Just adapting to really how things work, using different tools, using my phone. Phone was a pain. It took me a while to get used to pressing all these buttons on my phone. Getting used to how all the apps work. What disappointments did you have about Earth? Oh, a lot. Climate, people, a lot of things. There's a lot going on Earth, every day, politics. I just feel like we don't have to live life just like that. But it's happening. Yeah, disappointing in that matter. Where do you live now? I live in Mars. I bought myself a nice house in Marsville. It's a neighborhood that's called a really nice place. It's a fantastic view of the landscape on Mars. Did you continue your education after your soccer career ended? No, I hated school. Did you like school? I didn't like school. What was your career? My career was just playing soccer. I kick soccer balls for clubs. They pay me money to do that. They pay for people who would pay money to come watch me and my teammates play. Did you like your career? Yeah, 100%. I liked it every single day. Except for the injuries. The injuries were painful and disappointing. But other than that, I loved my career. What is your happiest memory after your soccer career ended? When I first got inducted into a mob. I was happy because I finally found a community to take me under their wing. I was really happy. Are you married? No. Let's pause here. Thank you guys. We'll put Kevin through his paces. Good job, both of you. You want to swap and do 15 more minutes or so? Yeah. Why don't you guys take a break for some water? I'm trying to stay in mind.