 Okay, so I'm gonna clap for the purpose of slating these two and then you can start after I play. Okay. Can you introduce yourself and tell us a little bit about you? Sure. My name is Kavaloud and I am a professional star player at LFC in Austin, First Chinese National Team. When were you born? It was born in August 7, 1999. Where were you born? At Mars. What was your name at birth? My name at birth was Kevin Lucinski. How do you spell your name? It's L-Y-U-S-H-I-N-S-K-Y. That's my last name. Kevin is this kid you got. Describe your life in your hometown and neighborhood before you became a professional soccer player. Oh, it was a pretty much... it was a great time. I had a lot of fun playing soccer and having a lot of fun with my friends. On the street of Mars and it was a great time. We had a lot of fun. Didn't do much other stuff as growing up as a kid. Pretty much just all I did was play soccer and just hanging out with my friend. And I really miss it. Describe your childhood. My childhood was good. I had loving parents. I had six siblings. We had a lot of fun together. My grandparents also, I spent a lot of time with my grandparents. That was fun. You're a good afterhand. Life on Mars is great to get. There's a lot of stuff to do as a kid. It's a good time. What was life like for you as a child? Well, as I said, I just play soccer most of the time. On Mars, I didn't do much other than that. I walked around and looked at the different space stations that were on Mars. Those were really fascinating. As a child, I guess the main thing that was playing soccer was just like the round. I checked out those space stations. I also spent a lot of time just staring into the universe. That was great. What was your daily routine as a child? The daily routine as a child, I would wake up probably around QAM, Mars Standard Time, have breakfast, and then just head out to school, spend a couple hours there and come back for lunch, and in the afternoon I would just go out and have soccer practice. After that, I just went home, had dinner, and just relaxed for the rest of the night. Share a happy or favorite memory from your childhood? Happy or favorite memory. The best memory was probably when I fell off a cliff and still managed to survive. That was really fun. That wasn't really fun. It was my favorite memory because the thrill of the falling down a cliff was really fun. I think just that really just sticking my memory. That's really a very memorable part of my childhood. What kind of a child were you? I was smart, disciplined, and also just messed around a little bit. Doing a little pranks here and there. Who was in your family? My family was my parents, my siblings, my grandparents, and also our family dog, with the name of Mark. What was your family like before you became a professional soccer player? No, it was a loving family. I spent a lot of time with my siblings. There's nothing that special about it, and I don't think becoming a professional soccer player changed any of that. We're still the family that we are. That used to be. What were your parents' names? My parents' names. My dad's name is Michael. My mom's name is Ashley. Describe your parents. My dad is a very serious man. It doesn't talk much, but he gets things done and I have a lot of respect for him. My mom just, she's a lovely woman. She looks after me and my siblings. She's been in the case a lot of her time to the family. What did your father or family do for a living before you became a professional soccer player? Well, my father was a basketball player, and my mom was a film producer. What was your father like? My father was a serious man. You know, amazing at basketball. You know, he can't really dunk on me. Even though now he's like in a 60, he can probably still beat me one-on-one in basketball. But, you know, anyway, he's a serious man and doesn't really like to jump around a lot. What was your mother like? My mom is very caring. You know, it really takes care of me. She loves taking care of everyone who's around her. What do you remember about your extended family? I extend the family. Obviously, I don't remember much about them. Obviously, I grew up growing up. Our moms, my extended family, they were still back on the earth. So, I didn't really have a lot of contact with them. Did you have brothers or sisters? Yes. I had six siblings. Three brothers, three sisters. What were the names of your siblings? The names of my siblings, my brothers, Fred. It was my oldest brother. Fred. It was Ken and Omar, my sisters, Maria, Alice, and my youngest sister. Her name is Bella. What was your relationship like with your siblings? Pretty good. I had a lot of fun together. I had a lot of fights for my brothers, but, you know, that's how many siblings are. We look after each other. Describe your family home. My family home is just a standard house on Mars. Not much in there, except for the basic necessities. Living on Mars is tough. You don't get a lot of stuff that you get on earth. We don't have many families. We don't have a backyard. We do have an area in the house to plan. A little bit of vegetables here and there. I spent a lot of time there. They have other than that, I felt Mars is harder than you know. It was just a standard house that we would see at the space stations. What languages did you speak as a child at home? I spoke the language. Omar's obviously. I spoke English. I spoke Swahili, Africa, and Mandarin Chinese. What was your family's religious identity before you were a professional soccer player? We were atheists. What did your religion mean to you as a child? As I said, I'm atheist. Not really much religious in terms of that. Did you have a favorite festival or holiday when you were growing up? Sure. I mean, I really loved the Independence Day of Mars. We do a lot of crazy stuff that my dad used to just take a spaceship and we would just go out of the solar system and go for a tour around the universe and come back to Mars. That was pretty much my favorite festival in the house. How did your family practice their faith before you became a professional soccer player? Not much. They're at the practice. What were your friends like before you became a professional soccer player? My friends were, you know, they were, how can I say? We did a lot of crazy stuff. We had a very good relationship with them. Basically, we grew up playing as a target together on the street on Mars. But other than that, we also did a lot of crazy stuff that we probably shouldn't have done. It was just a very wild group of boys. What happened to your friends from before you were a professional soccer player? From before, I am still in contact with most of them. Two of them sadly passed away on the mission to Jupiter. We all missed them. For the rest of us, we still have a pretty good relationship. We still hang out sometime. We still have time together. What was school like when you were younger? School was fun. It was also just like any other school. It's just strict at school. We had a really strict home teacher and also had a grade. Didn't really got to do much crazy stuff at school. Yeah, school was a good memory. I mean, I definitely ran a lot. Did you do well in school? I did okay. I got As and B's. What were your favorite things to do as a child? Probably just play soccer and nap. How do you like to teach your naps throughout the day? What were your favorite sports or games to play when you were young? I played soccer, but I also played baseball and parasailing. I also had a lot of fun playing pole, lacrosse. What was your favorite food as a child? Pizza. What is your favorite food memory from childhood? Eating those big pizzas with pineapples on them. We like pineapples on pizza. Pizza makes me happy. It still does. What music did you like when you were young? Cagier, Drake, Justin Bieber, also a few artists on bars. One of his names, Walabu. Did you have any pets when you were a child? Yeah, or family, dog, Mark. Were you ever bullied as a child? Not really. I mean, I feel like I was always the bully instead of getting bullied. Yeah. Where should I go from here? Because this way. You can keep scrolling down. Okay. What are the general questions? Let's see. I can just ask, like, how old do you want this one? How old were you when you became a professional soccer player? Oh, I got my first contract with Sean Hochand while I was 16 years old. How long were you with that team? I mean, I played the footer academy system for three years. So, including Academy time and also at the time there, I think in total, like, probably ten years. Yeah. I'll be accurate. How long were you at your next team? I was at my next team for three seasons. We can go through all of these, too. So, these will just be, like, repeat after me for entrance. Okay. And let's do each one twice. That'll eat up a good amount of time. Okay. So, should I just say once and then he sends it twice? Yeah. So, we're going to do, like, Jacqueline's going to say something and you're going to repeat it. And then give it, like, a three to five second count and then repeat it again. And then we'll move on to the next one. These are for, like, intro, like... Repeat as in, like, I repeat exactly. She's going to say hi. You'll say hi. She says raspberries. You say raspberries. Okay. Okay. Ready? Okay. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hi. Hi. Hi. Hello. How are you? Hello. How are you? Hi. How are you? Hi. How are you? Hi. How are you? Hi. How are you? How are you? How are you? I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine. Thank you. You so we do that on yeah I'm fine thank you. I'm fine thank you. Thank you. Thank you for being here. Thank you for being here. Thank you. Thank you for sharing. Thank you for sharing. you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking your questions. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking your questions. It's been my pleasure. Thank you for asking your questions. Good morning. Good morning. Good morning. Good bye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Good day. Good day. Good day. I hope you visit again. I hope you visit again. I hope you visit again. I hope you've learned something from your visit today. I hope you have learned something from me visit today. I hope you've learned something from me visit today. Welcome. Welcome. Welcome. You do the USC for the institution. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Please go ahead and ask. Please go ahead and ask. Please go ahead and ask. You can ask me any question you'd like. You can ask me any question you'd like. You can ask me any question you'd like. Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me? My name is... My name is... What should I just say? You'd say, yeah. You're using Kevin for the center view, right? Yeah, okay. My name is Kevin, and I am here to answer your questions. My name is Kevin. I'm here to answer your questions. My name is Kevin. I'm here to answer your questions. My name is Kevin. My name is Kevin. My name is Kevin. My name is Kevin, and I'm a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin, and I am a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. So is this the same concept? He repeats after me. Let's come back to that. Okay. Let's do the zero section where we can plug in and soccer as the subject. Let's do post soccer. We can do post soccer. Okay. What was it like to return home after your soccer career ended? Oh, it was definitely a spell special. Having played for a sexual on time, pretty much, after on my life, going home after retirement is, you feel, I feel, you know, there's a lot of emptiness inside. Not knowing what to do and just waking up in the middle of the night and just not knowing what's going to happen tomorrow. I definitely wouldn't say it's great. It was a great feeling to finally come home after playing. After your career ended, how did you start over with nothing? I took up a job as an electrical engineer, hallmarks and space stations. Just started off from scratch, learning from the basics, just trying to fill my life with something beautiful. So, yeah. How did you rebuild your life? I first started off as a electrical engineer, electrician, and then I joined the mob on the Mars. I didn't have much other choice. I mean, I was looking for something thrilling in life, so I just joined the mob. I started off as just a nobody in the mob and just worked my way up from finishing up the test at my boss. Just telling him to do it. I'm just doing what I've been told and staying humble. Just work my way up. Were you able to ever recover any of your possessions from your childhood? I have a little bit of care there, here and there. Not much though. Is there any item that you missed from when you were growing up? Yes, it was mugged at my friend gave me on my 18th birthday. It meant a lot for me, but I lost there somewhere. I was looking for it, but I really wanted to find it again. How was seeing your family after the end of your career? It was emotional. Obviously, they were all Mars, so they can go wash and play, but returning to my family was definitely emotional. We had a good time to win. Who took care of you after your career ended? Myself. What do you remember from right when your career ended? I just remember playing my last game and waving goodbye to the fans in the stadium. It was definitely emotional. There was a lot of tears. Right after Dad, it was really just empty. There was nothing going on in life. I didn't go to practice. Obviously, I didn't play. I didn't play recreationally. I just said goodbye to Sarvina. When did you come to Earth? I came to Earth when I was 13 years old when I joined the Academy. Why did you come to Earth? To place on Earth. Obviously, on Mars, the opportunities aren't there. The Earth was the closest thing to fulfill my dream as a professional player. What was your experience coming to Earth from Mars? It was a long journey. It was probably three weeks or so just on a spaceship. A lot of turbulence here and there. We also got attacked by a bunch of barriers. It was fun. We had a nice conversation with them. They decided to not take any possession from us. The journey itself was a story. What language barriers did you have on Earth and how did you overcome them? I spoke a lot of languages. I always found myself to be a smart language. I can pick a new language from scratch. It just mattered a few days. Not a real language barrier. I also think sports is a universal language. How did you learn these different languages? I learned by using apps on my phone and also by talking to local people. What expectations did you have about Earth? I expected to be a beautiful place, which is... I expected a lot of stress. A lot of stress that doesn't need to be there. Obviously, we didn't have any stress about Mars and everyone was living their life. I think it was fine. I think in terms of stress, it definitely wasn't that much. We had that expectation coming in on us, kid. Did you go through an orientation before or after you settled on Earth? Yeah. Obviously, I joined the Academy team. It's a person. My coach gave me an old run through what life was like on Earth. How to deal with different things, how to use Apple Pay, how to check emails. I didn't know what to do. How to use the Internet. Was the host community on Earth welcoming? Yeah, really welcoming. It just really took me under the winds. Yeah, I appreciate the help. What surprised you the most about living on Earth? Mainly just the amount of oxygen that's on Earth. It's crazy. I mean, so much oxygen to breathe in. It took me a while to get used to that. Also, just talking to people, saying, hi, how are you doing? I was really used to that when I was back in March. But yeah, it definitely took a while to get used to that. Share a happier favorite memory about living on Earth? With a lot of memories, too many memories for me to count, to be honest. I would say my favorite memory would be my first game that I played as a professional player, which is a dream come true moment. Did you experience difficulties adapting to Earth? A lot, as I said, adapting to how people interact with each other here. Just adapting to really how things work using different tools, using my phone. Phone was a pain. It took me a while to get used to pressing all these buttons on my phone. Getting used to how the other apps work took me a while. What disappointments did you have about Earth? A lot. Climate, people, a lot of things. There's a lot going on Earth every day, politics. I just feel like we don't have to live life, that's like that, but it's happening. So, at this point, that matter. Where do you live now? I live in Mars. I bought myself a nice house in Marsville. It's a neighborhood that's called a really nice place. A fantastic view of the landscape on Mars. Did you continue your education after your soccer career ended? No, I hated school. Did you like school? I didn't like school. What was your career? My career was just play soccer. I kicked soccer balls for clubs. They paid me money to do that. And I played for people who would pay money to come watch me at my tennis play. Did you like your career? Yeah, 100%. I liked it every single day, except for the injuries. They were painful at this point. But I didn't know that. I loved my career. What is your happiest memory after your soccer career ended? I was probably, when I first got inducted into the mob, I was happy because I finally found a community to take me under your lens. That was really happy. Are you married? No. What's pause here? Thank you guys. Kevin through his paces. Good job, both of you. You want to swap and do 15 more minutes or so? Yeah. Why don't you guys take a break for some water? Just try to stay mine.