 Okay, so I'm gonna clap for the purpose of slating these two and then you can start after I play Can you introduce yourself and tell us a little bit about you? Sure My name's Kaleluu and I am a professional soccer player at LFC in also first-hand with national team When were you born born in August 7th, 1999? Where were you born? At Mars What was your name at birth? My name at birth was Kevin Luciensky How do you spell your name? It's L-Y-U-S-H-I-N-S-K-Y That's my last name. Kevin, this is K-D-I-N Describe your life in your hometown and neighborhood before you became a professional soccer player Oh, it was uh, I pretty much it was a great time I mean I had a lot of fun just playing soccer and having a lot of fun with my friends on the street of Mars And it was it was a great time. Yeah, we had a lot of fun Didn't do much other stuff as growing up as a kid and pretty much just saw it. It was a place already in just hanging out with my friend Yeah, yeah, really miss it Describe your childhood My childhood was good at loving parents That had six siblings so we we had a lot of fun together My grandparents also I spend a lot of time with my grandparents So you know that was a nice fun 3-8, you know, look after me and you know life on Mars is pretty good. Yeah, there's all the stuff to do as a kid and It's a good time What was life like for you as a child? Well, as I said, I just play soccer most of the time and you know on Mars You know, I Didn't do much other than that. I mean I walked around and You know with that the different space stations there that were on Mars, you know those really fascinated me and You know as a child I just I guess the main thing that there was there's hockey I'm just like around Check checked out those space stations I also I also spent a lot of time just staring into the universe What was your daily routine as a child? The routine as a child I will wake up probably around QAM Mars standard time have breakfast and Head out to head out to to school spend spend a couple hours there and come back for lunch come back home for lunch and Yeah, and just in the afternoon I would just go out and soccer practice you know just after that I just You know went home had dinner and just relax with her or some night Sure a happier favorite memory from your childhood I'm happy your favorite memory I mean the best memory was probably when I felt off a cliff and still you know managed to survive that was really fun. That wasn't really fun, but you know I It was it was my favorite memory because the thrill of the fun down the cliff was was really was really fun and I think You know just dad you really just stick in my memory That's really a memorable part of my childhood What kind of a child were you? I was smart discipline and also you know just messed around a little bit Pranks here in there Who was in your family? My family was My parents my siblings My grandparents and also are fun a family dog With the name of Mark What was your family like before you became a professional soccer player? No, no, it was just like It was it was a loving family I spent a lot of time with my siblings Yeah, it was There's nothing that's special about it and I don't think becoming a professional soccer player change I mean that You know we're still the fun that we are They're used to being What were your parents names? My parents names my dad's name is Michael. My mom's name is Ashley Describe your parents. Oh, my dad is very serious man Doesn't talk much But he gets things done and I have a lot of respect for him my mom My mom just She's a lovely woman And she looks after me and my siblings She then encays a lot of her time to a family What did your father or family do for a living before you became a professional soccer player? Well, my father was a basketball player and my mom was a film producer What was your father like? My father was a serious man You know amazing at basketball You can't really come to me even though now he's like in a 60 and you're probably still Maybe you want to want a basketball But you know, anyway, he's a serious man and Doesn't really like to jump around a lot What was your mother like? My mom is very caring It really takes care of me and she loves taking care of everyone who's around her What do you remember about your extended family? My extended family honestly, I don't remember much about them Obviously, obviously grew up growing up. Our marks my extended family. They were still Back on the earth. So why do you have a lot of content though? Did you have brothers or sisters? Yes, I've had Three brothers three sisters What were the names of your siblings? Names of my sibling My brothers Fred is my oldest brother Fred was Ken and Omar my sisters Maria Alice and My my youngest sister her name is Bella What was your relationship like with your siblings? Pretty good a lot of fun together had a lot of fights when my brothers, but You know, that's that's How I just said was are we we look after each other Describe your family home My family home Just a standard house or Mars Not much in there except for the for the basic necessities Living on Mars is tough, you know, you don't get a lot of stuff that you get on earth We had a we don't have like Like many families we don't have a backyard. We we do have a Area in the house to plan You know vegetables here in there I spent a lot of time there They have under the net left of Mars as hard in the notes just just standard house that we will see at the space stations What languages did you speak as a child at home? I spoke The language Omar's obviously I spoke English spoke Swahili I've recon and there are any channels What was your family's religious identity before you are a professional soccer player? Oh, we're What did your religion mean to you as a child? Oh, as I said, I'm not making so Not really much Did you have a favorite festival or holiday when you were growing up? Sure I mean I really love the Independence Day of Mars You know, we do a lot of pretty stuff on that day You know my dad used to just take a spaceship and we will you know Just go out of the solar system and you know go for a tour around the universe and come back to Mars So yeah, that was pretty much my favorite That's what I was good How did your family practice their faith before you became a professional soccer player? Not much What were your friends like before you became a professional soccer player? My friends were How can I say you know we did a lot of crazy stuff Had a very good relationship with them. We basically we grew up playing soccer together on the stream Mars But other than that we also De La That we probably shouldn't have done What happened to your friends from before your professional soccer player? From the I am still in contact with most of them To go from Sally passed away on the mission to to to Jupiter Yeah, we all missed them The rest of boys still have a Your relationship Stay hanging out some time time together What was school like when you were younger school was School was uh, how can I say it was it was fun. I was also Just like any other school. It's just they're it's it's strict at school You know we we had a really strict home teacher and also had grades so Didn't really got to do much crazy stuff at school Yeah school It's a good memory. I mean I definitely do well in school And it okay. I got easy What were your favorite things to do as a child? Probably just play soccer And that are you like to teach them that? Throughout the day What were your favorite sports or games to play when you were young? I play soccer ball so played uh baseball and parasailing and you know I also have a lot of fun playing pole across What was your favorite food as a child? Pizza What is your favorite food memory from childhood? Well Eating those big pizza with pineapples on them And you like pineapples on pizza And you know just Pizza makes me happy still the best still does What music did you like when you were young? Ka-yeh Drake Justin Bieber also a few artists on bars One of his names Wa-la-lu Did you have any pets when you were a child? Yeah our family dog Mark Were you ever bullied as a child? Not really I mean I feel like I was always the bully because of getting bullied Where should I go from here? Because that's it In keeps rolling down What are the general questions? How old were you when you became a professional soccer player? Oh I got my first contract with Shana Ash and well when I was 16 years old How long were you with that team? I mean I played for the Academy system for a few years So including an Academy time and also a lot of time there I think in total like probably 10 years Yeah That'd be accurate How long were you at your next team? I was at the next team for three seasons We can go through all of these two So these will just be like repeat after me for entrance Okay And let's do each one twice that'll get them out of time Okay so should I just say once in a few since it? Yeah twice Yeah So we're gonna do like Jack wants to say something and you're gonna repeat it And then give it like a three to five second count and then repeat it again And then we'll move on to the next one These are for like intro like Repeat as in like I repeat Exactly She's gonna say hi You'll say hi She says raspberries You say raspberries Okay Good Ready? Hello Hello Hello Hi Hi Hi Hello I'm fine, how are you? Hi, how are you? Where are you? Hi, how are you? How are you? I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine, how are you? I'm fine, how are you? I'm fine. Thank you. Thank you fordialAlltenKey. valves and You know, I'm fine. Thank you. resolved for the right to make new Magnolia great hand. Bye. Thank you. I'm fine.enberg. about getting missing replies and telling yourself that your loss hurts as well. It's been my pleasure. Thankyou for asking your question. This shit's been myNSA it. Good morning goodidays good bake. Config goodbye. Good phrase a good trip and drive this with you BCR Girls us in good day. Good I hope you visit again. I hope you visit again. I hope you've noticed it again. I hope you've learned something from your visit today. I hope you've learned something from your visit today. I hope you learn something from your visit today. Welcome. Welcome. Welcome. We do USC, Finneants ofoom should. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Welcome to USC. Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Please go ahead and ask. Please go ahead and ask. Please go ahead and ask. You can ask me any question you like. You can ask me any question you like. You can ask me any question you like. Do you have any questions, for me? Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me? My name is. My name is outside. Should I say... Yeah, you're using Kevin for the Center. You're right. Yeah, okay. My name is Kevin and I'm here to answer your questions My name is Kevin. I'm here to answer your questions. My name is Kevin. My name is Kevin My name's Kevin. My name is Kevin. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. Okay. So is this the same concept, but he repeats after me? Let's come back to that. Okay. Let's do a zero section with a plug-in and soccer-res the subject. Let's do post-salker. We can do post-salker. Okay. What was it like to return home after your soccer career ended? It was definitely a definitely special having played for a section of all time. I'm pretty much off the run of my life, going home after retirement. You feel I feel there's a lot of emptiness inside. I'm not knowing what to do. I'm just waking up in the middle of the night. I definitely wouldn't say it's great to find a great feeling to come home after playing. After your career ended, how did you start over with nothing? I took up a job as an electrical engineer at all Mars and the space station which is just started off from scratch, learning from the basics, just trying to fill in my life with something to be involved. How did you rebuild your life? I first started off as an electrical engineer at L Fisherson's and then I joined the mob on the Mars. I didn't have much other choice. I was looking for something thrilling in life so I just tried to mob. I started off as a nobody in the mob and just worked my way up from finishing up the task that my boss was telling me to do. I just had doing what I told him, doing what I've been told and staying on the board. Were you able to ever recover any of your possessions from your childhood? I had a little bit of care there, hearing there, not much though. Is there any item that you missed from when you were growing up? Yes. My mother, it wasn't like that. My friend gave me all my 18th birthday met a lot for me, but I lost there somewhere. I was just always looking for it, but I really didn't really want to find it again. How was seeing your family after the end of your career? It was emotional. Obviously there were all Mars, so they can go wash your plate, but returning to my family was there for emotional. We had a good time to learn. Who took care of you after your career ended? What do you remember from right when your career ended? I just remember playing my last game and waving goodbye to the fans in the stadium. It was definitely a different emotional. There was a lot of tears right after dad. I was just like, empty. I didn't go to practice. Obviously they didn't play recreationally. I was just thinking about this argument. When did you come to Earth? When did you come to Earth? Why did you come to Earth? To place our... Obviously our Mars, the opportunities aren't there. They are in the closeest thing to fulfill on my dream. I became a professional player. What was your experience like coming to Earth from Mars? I was a long journey. It was probably three weeks or so just on a spaceship. A lot of turbulence here and there. I've also got attacked by a bunch of aliens. I know what me and I was, it was fun. We had a nice conversation with them, so we decided to not take any possession from us. The journey itself was... It was... it was the story. What language barriers did you have on Earth and how did you overcome them? I spoke a lot. I always found myself to be a smart language. I can pick new language that I first scratched. It just mattered a few days. So, how are you language value? Really a language barrier. And also thank sports as a universal language by the of the close sports. How did you learn these different languages? I learned by using apps on my phone. And also by talking to local people. Well, when expectations did you have about Earth, I expected to be a beautiful place, which is... I expected a lot of stress. A lot of stress that doesn't need to be there. Obviously they're having stress from Mars and I were almost looking into life. But, you know, Earth is fine. I think terms of stress definitely wasn't that much. But, did we have that? Expectation company? Did you go through an orientation before or after you settled on Earth? Yeah. Obviously I joined an academy team for soccer. So, my coach gave me an appointment through what life was like on Earth. Just how to deal with different things, how to use Apple Pay, how to use, how to check emails. I don't know what you know. How to use the internet. Yeah. Was the host community on Earth welcoming? Yeah. Really welcoming. You know, just really took me on the other two wins. Yeah. I appreciate the help. What surprised you the most about living on Earth? Mainly just the amount of oxygen that's on Earth, uh, crazy. I mean, I had so much oxygen to breathe in. You know, I was at Took me a while to use to that. And also just talking to people, you know, saying, you know, hi, how are you doing? You know, I was really used to that. You know, when I was talking about Mars, but yeah, definitely took a while for me to use to that. Sure. I'm happy your favorite memory about living on Earth. A lot of memories, too many memories for me, the count, to be honest. I would say that for my favorite memory, will be my first game that I play as a professional player. It's a dream, come true moment. Did you experience difficulties adapting to Earth? A lot, as I said, adapting to how people interact with each other here. Just adapting to really how things work. You know, using different tools, using my phone. The phone was really, it was a pain. It took me a while to get used to pressing all these buttons on my phone. Getting used to how the apps work took me a while. What disappointments did you have about Earth? I call a lot of climate people. A lot of things. There's a lot going on Earth every day, politics. You know, I just feel like, you know, we don't have to live life, that's like that, but it's happening. So, at this point, that never... Where do you live now? I live in Mars. I bought myself a nice house. Yeah, in Marsville. It's a neighborhood that was called. A nice place. A fantastic view of the landscape of Mars. Yeah. Did you continue your education after your soccer career ended? No, I hated school. Did you like school? I didn't like school. What was your career? My career was just a place awkward. I kicked soccer balls for clubs. I paid my money to do that. And I played for people who would pay money to come and watch me. My team is playing. Did you like your career? Yeah, 100% liked every single day, but except for the injuries. I was probably a... When I first got inducted into a mob, I was happy because I finally found a community to take me under my lens. That was really happy. Are you married? No. What's pause here? Thank you guys. Kevin through his paces. Good job, Molta View. I'm gonna swap and do 15 more minutes or so. Yeah. Why don't you guys take a break for some water? Just try and stay in mind.