mr. beckler, we were talking about religious observance. do you remember celebrating the high holidays? oh, yeah. yes. i remember. i should tell you. please. it was come every young keeper, you know. my father, but 12, his leaders before the, you know, he went all, all this and sure. no, every young keeper, you know, he went and got a kitten, you know, was a kitten, you know, this, he went there. and i remember he took me there to, you know, the best children, you know, i've admitted, you know, and they pray, you know, this was the high holidays. in, where we was young, i remember we, a drink water, a drink with kids, you know, three, five years old, nobody, no, this, they never give us a drink water. this, this is a very early young keeper. young keeper, who wants, you know, i passed. i passed. i remember my mother give me, you know, in the shoe. i went with the father in shoe and she give me a piece of holland, a flea, you know, chicken there. no, i tell you that i haven't eaten, later. but film o'clock, he give me, you know, i eat, it's not like this when i got bigger, you understand. i was fast in august. even now i'm not so religious, you know, young keeper, you see, even, i know it. it's not religious, no, i passed. the rabbi, rabbi menasha, he would come in for the high holidays. he come for the most high holidays. it's not the holidays, you know, but the rabbi, a lot see them, they go to jesu, reisha. now the most he come high holidays, so it's in them shtibal. in this shtibal, but they have a small, you know, it's small. so they went all in shoe, the allen, the allen see them, in shoe, the shoes can go a few hundred people. so they went, yeah, many times he was coming there. you mentioned the hasidim went to visit the rebbe. yes. do you remember any occasions where your father or perhaps grandfather traveled to the rebbe for advice? my grandfather was there always. my grandfather was met the rabbi together in reisha. he was in zavikos, since he gave him this, a gabim with him, you know, so he was always. now i remember when he was 72 years old, he's come home to stay with the daughter, with the grandchildren, with this. he told me, the world see god, i came home shtibal, you know. then he was coming home. before, when he was younger, he used to got, you know, he used to got, you know, to make paint, paint, pin stones. this is such a fabric, but he burn stones. he got stones, a bottle of fire in the pin stones that make the white paint. he used to got this. he used to got boots, you know, a rent. they used to burn the, and after the son took over, he swore, and he died talking in the cemetery. the son died. no, my grandfather died. no, the son was together with my son, you know. this thing, make. after he used to real estate, he used to my son, you know. that's not when he went to the rabbi. he gives over, always the son. the son got four sons. in the son, there was working to be fabric, pin stones. and i used to go from my city, zabihos, ozeroth, chemelyev, skarzysko, ultimate faith, the bogeh, and give the stuff that they, you know. this is, got a living. this is my mom, my mom's brother. this is make a living. he used to live in a nice house, you know. what happened, you know what happened to the rabbi? the rabbi, okay, got killed. he was alive. when i went away, he was alive. he died. they killed him. no, horrible. a rabbi, he was a rabbi, a manish alm, a rabbi. a rabbi, he died before, yeah, he died before. a rabbi, a manish alm, he went away. everybody, they killed him. in my city was the son, moshe. we went, when the war started, all jewish, they went to market, you know, in the rabbi. a lot they wouldn't go away. the rabbi told me, no, don't go, don't rabbi, you know. it's not, even it's coming, you know, nobody believe. nobody believe. this is the reason. if my state, nobody went away. well, how aware were you of events that were taking place in germany before the war? before the war. before the war. did you know what was going on in germany? i know, of course. i know why i know. a lot they come up from germany in 1938. they went to poland, they went all over, you know. but they run away. they know. they told me it's very bad. hitler is no good. this is the reason. but we run away. german jewish, you understand. this is the reason. there was a christian night. they told us, you understand. you remember? i felt what you read about that. i remember, yeah. no, i know. i couldn't, i couldn't find out. even i was in russia. why i was coming home. then i know, i know, meet nobody. for my family, i stay in russia. you know why? well, i couldn't, no, i couldn't believe, you know. all got killed. when i was coming home, you know, everybody, they told me. they took away from the arses, they took away the jewish. they killed them not for eight kilometer because of isis. this you found out when? this i found out when i was coming in 1946. this is the reason i was coming from russia to see. the family, i couldn't believe. i mean, maybe i find somebody, a sister at this. you know, i couldn't find out. let's go back a little bit because i'm going to ask you about that. yeah. your after-war experiences. but do you remember what you did and how you felt on september 1st, 1939, when the war broke out? yeah, oh, yeah. my mother told me, shmiel, you see, it's like this, i should go away. and the older children, they wasn't lodged. when the war started, they was coming back from the lodge to the mother. we was all together, you know. and after my mother told me, shmiel, go away. you go away, you know. i said, you know, where i can leave you. no, not after my friends come in, shmiel, you go away, you see what they took. they take the most work. and they say that you should go. you should go away from the, some, some adults, you know. we don't know. we don't know, you know. they make, have russian, this, we don't know. we just run away when, when it was very bad, you know. and i was there two weeks, i think, three weeks, i remember. it took us to work. when did the nazis first come into zavikost? in september, first september, the second september. they were there on zavikost? yeah, i was the second, the third, but two, three weeks. after they took all women in this, to work, we work, you know. and the streets, you know, the streets, everything, they, you know. and this is the reason we run away. this was in the night, i remember, but two, two weeks, three weeks. you ran away two weeks after? yeah, after this, huh? tell me about the first two weeks. how did life change? oh, the life change. the two weeks when i run away on the road, i saw, on the road, a lot run away, you understand. in the germans with the 36 planes, you know, the shot of the people, you know. with the polniot, you know, a lot of killer horses, the wegmen, wagons, you know. in very bad, very bad, all the road, all the road you should see when they kill them. oh, oh, in the plane, in the shot. in, i went away, i went to skarjisk, not skarjisk, krasnik, lubelsk, all stayed out there. januf lubelsk, you know, in there, we run, we run the belzkovat. but the rabbi, we was, coming friday night, i remember they used to give us khalen, fish, fish, you know, we run away. and a lot, a lot is sitting in the end of lubelsk, you know. but we don't know where, where, everyone, you know. so you don't know where, you just ran. just ran. what did you take with you? nothing. just like those, i got nothing with nothing. who did you run away with? who did you run away with? my friends, a lot. how many? three friends, three friends, i got, no, there was on the road a lot. we meet, and we, all together, you understand. you see, i don't know, i don't know. three friends, i got good friends when i was in school, in haider, you know. when i have the picture taken, and we run away, on god's kingdom. the rest of your family, your younger brother and your sister stayed home. they left home. they stayed home. they stayed home. my mother, you forced me, you know, gosh, me, go, go, go, go. you know, i run, and after, let me tell you, i won't go back. i was crying. i was 17 years old. i was crying, and i won't go back. i told myself, i live, my mother was sick, you know, she, very nervous, everything, you know. and i won't go back. i couldn't go back. it was fire all over. you know, we went, we went, till we, i remember, after, oh, we was, yannov rebels, yannov, yeah. and after crashing, crashing, i got family, they give me a few dollars, i should go away. and they went to other places. and then i went to japan, ukraine, but i see snow planes, no nothing, quiet, and i don't know what's the disease. how did you get there? i walk. we walk, and a lot of got horses, buggers, horses, no cars. they took us. how long did it take? oh, took me two weeks, three weeks. three weeks, took four weeks. tell me what's coming. you know, i see quiet, after i find out the russians there. it's a lot, a lot they got the uniform, you know, the uniform in polish, yeah, in the russian kingdom. polish, polish, polish, then the russian, then they run away too, the polish, you understand? i don't know if it's, or jewish, it's not jewish. there wasn't the polish army, no, they run away too, you understand? and the, the russian came, the hour, but they went there, there's clothes, polish clothes, you know, this. after a lot, they went to the jewish, they give them a jacket, they change, they change this. and i was in, there, in japan, ukraine, in rovna. in the russian, in rovna? in rovna. in this russian occupied area, did you have to protect, did you hide your jewish identity? no, no, no, that was also jewish. that was jewish. that was jewish. you know, i, i, i went, three brothers, they was, you know, i'm telling, i'm, i run away from who he took me inside. goose, mikho goose, i never forget all brothers, and they told me, maybe you work for me, he used to sell, you know, wheat, and fabric, you know, flour, everything, you know, that i used to find. enough there, every bezhnik, they call bezhnik, you know, they must register, you know, you must, i register to go home. who wants to go home? they can go home. no, i register, i will go home. you know, when i register to go home, they send me to siberia. why did, were you picked to go to siberia? they pick, the russians. i mean... what were the circumstances that they picked you, just... not me. they picked everybody who registered. but i won't go home. i won't go home to my mother, you know, i know i left mother, you know. i mean, i couldn't go, i couldn't go, the, the, why i registered to go home? that they said that's siberia, in a coal mine. where in siberia? novosibirsk. novosibirsk, in the coal mine, you know, this i can't. i wish my, i wish my death, you know, my death. we used to work there, 18 hours in the coal mine, no food. they got 600 gram bread a day. this, the bread was like a stone, you know. go on, a little bit. we used to work with our little she, she was, was a little brother with us all tickle. in this you work, 14, 15 hours in the coal mine, you know. and every day in the coal mine, you know, when they take the coal, they put holes and they put dynamite. folds down in the coal, you know. a lot of, every day, eight people, ten people got killed in the coal mine. and i was 18 months in the coal mine, you know. i tell you, no, hungarian, hungarian, i tell you, no, i must go in the army. kill a few germans, you know, in the coming, i mean, like this. it took me, you know, long, eight months, you know. this was every day. every day, every day, and i used to work, you know, in hungary. i remember i went to the doctor, you know, i couldn't walk to the work, you know. i couldn't walk and i couldn't work, you know. they hit me, this, i should, but i couldn't, you know, till i have a now took, you know. i got this and they, i used to, i was a lesser-than-star chick, you know, was a lesser-than-star chick. i used to carry big beans. then they take the coal, you know. they hold it there, you know. no, there was gas, there was, i think, in mine, my life is all dead together. you understand? it's better to go in the army, you know. i wrote, as i have lenin, as i have lenin, i won't go in the army. well, how did you have the opportunity to enlist in the russian army? well, you're fifteen, eight and a half, and they told us, who wants to go to the army, can go to the army. i wrote, as i have lenin, you know, took three months, they said i should go to bersk in the punk. then they learned after the automatic, the rifle, you know. then i went there in 1942. i remember they sent me in state study prep. i wasn't studying bersk. i learned. and after we learned, i was an engineer, engineer, pantone, and bridgeman, you know. we used to build, we used to build on the volga, the bridgeman, you know. pantone. pantone, you know. we built the katyusha vent, the tanks went, and after we take apart, we built another. what was the name? do you remember the name of the unit that you were in? 65 pantone, pantone engineer. yeah, 65 polk. this i remember. and the work you were doing were to build the pantones. there was erkigno, there i don't care for my dad. food i got, vodka, every day, you see. spirit they give me. you know what spirit? this was we went, you know. and after this, we built the breacher in the night, you know. we cut woods. the woods for the breacher. it was day and night. there was food and this. i don't care for the death. you know, a lot got killed and they built. you should see the planes, the german planes, you know. so where was this? which battles were... stalingrad. stalingrad. stalingrad. this wasn't stalingrad. yeah. oh. yeah. and when you were in the russian army, did they, the people you worked with, did they know of your jewish identity? yeah. they know. i told them, i never did. then i was afraid. did you experience any anti-semitism in the russian army? you see, when i was there was, yeah, in the colon mine, ukraine, not russian, ukraine. but they was in russia. they was big anti-semitism. they, he killed so many in the colon mine. in colon mine, you know, if you kill, they mean he kill, cherub of his name. he told me many times, i was a good working. he told me, you, g.j., partially, you know, this is not jewish, spinach, or jolosh. from somebody's oaks, you eat. you know, this is cherub of other oaks, you, g.j., you eat. oh, yeah. there was, no, you see, but stalin, maybe he was a communist. no, there was, the russian people alone was good people. a lot of times, how much they give me potatoes, you know, i used to do a job for them, you know, cutting hay for the, this. by russian, every family, they got a cow, chickens, you understand. this was, there was a long push. there was good, russian people was good. but the government alone, you know, even there was election, i remember. you know, i couldn't vote. i never vote this time. this was in russia. while you were there, did you maintain your observance of judaism? no, then there was. then i was there, i was looking all over there, all closed. all synagogues, big synagogues, there was, all closed. all, there is nothing, no, no. even i finally remember, there was, after the vote, yeah, after the vote, i find such religious people, you know. we got sinners, you know, with peace. this after the vote, then i went there. then i find, they got steeblakh, you know. how you say, nobody know. the government, they said, what, this was in, as understand, in other, this, but they was religious, jewish. a lot, they got malu, you know, they got everything, you know. this was for the government. they was afraid for the government. they got. so while you were in the russian army, you encountered jews in russia? eh? you encountered, you met jews living in russia? yeah, yeah. i got a prokonik, a general. he was a jew. he was, yeah, you know. he was so good, you know. he told me, no, this is, he gave me a lot of bread of this, yeah. a lot prokonik, it was in the russian. but i was a minor platoon, you know. it was the government, the government, you know. he was a general, but very big. it was good to me. he told me he likes me, you know. did you, while you were in russia, did you know what was going on in poland? no, no. what about news of the war? was there any news that you received? i never know this. this, never, you see. no papers, no radio. we never, we never believed. and i know, i tell you, when i know it's like this, i've never come home. i've been staying in russia. you know why? i used to go meet a jewish giurinder, specter there after the war, you know. and i used to love, the father was, i say, oh, it's something. nice, nice family. they got two sons in the army, you know. every friday they invite me, you know. she make colors, she make this. i was close, too. and after i was coming, who wants to go to poland? back. but general sikorski, the polish minister, they told who was born in poland? they came back to poland. this is the reason i went back to poland. why? i couldn't believe, you know, my family got killed. did you go in with the russian army into poland toward the end of the war? no, not with the russian army. i went with the shiloh. when did your military so again? 1946, the ending in 1945. i was in the hospital. yeah, you know, i went that twice. how did you get one? with the shrapnel. we went and shot. where? when? in the back. this was in 1942, 1943. yeah. what part of russia? where was this? this was in stalingrad, by the bridges. but when you built the bridges, you know, they shot and i got wounded. this was in 1943 or 1944. i was in the hospital in stalingrad. they entered the war. until the end of the war? yeah. after when they released me, no more war. were you given a medal because you were wounded? i got, you know, a passport to go in the restaurants. not to a restaurant, to eat there, you know, to eat there, lunch. this i got until i went home. so when you went home, you were already out of uniform. yeah. you turned into a civilian. of course, civilian, yeah. this i went home. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe, you know, i can find nobody. you see, this is very... so you returned directly to zavikost? yeah. directly to zavikost. and when i was coming up, the people stayed to zavikost. no jewish, no, nobody. for luck, they told me, i asked for my teachers, you know, public school. i remember, you know, sibetsky, you know, they told me he's alive. and they told me where he lives. he was living on another side. and i went to him. i went to him. he told me, such a nice... you see, there is a lot of politics. he was so good. give me a eatin', give me money. he told me, shmuliek, gostant, there is pogromen. when i was there in 1946, there was the pogromen kellits. they killed 150 people. that was the time you were in zavikost? this is the time i was in zavikost. how many actions against jews in zavikost at that time? i couldn't stay. i was a day there. i was by, you know, let me go. but there was such a... when they see a jew, you understand? they killed him. so it was very dangerous for you to do that. very dangerous. this is the reason he gave me money. he told me, go away. where i went, i went... austria. well, before we get there, let me ask you. yeah. how did you discover what happened to your family who told you? somebody told me that, you know. and they described what happened in 1943. yeah, 1943. somebody told me they're in zavikost, you know. the teacher, sobetsky, and others, you know. what did they tell you? they took out the jewish and they killed them. in zavikost, in stata, they killed them in dreykozi, eight kilometers, you know. did they say who participated? they say a lot. pollocks. the most pollocks. pollocks helped. pollocks helped the nazis. pollocks helped the nazis. in the executions? yeah. the most pollocks. this is the reason i can't stand it. there was a picture. they had jewish a lot. there was a picture with them. he saved a lot of jews here. you know why he saved the jewish? he couldn't make no more money. there was a shindler's list. shindler's list, you understand? like this. no. he saved. but they gave him gold and this and everything, you understand? but he couldn't, was ended the war soon, you understand? he took them to work. no, he saved, like, a thousand, for this. or they not tried him. no, like this, he was the same nazi like everybody. we're going to stop here to change the tapes right now. thank you. thank you.