. my name is manuel bakir. today is november 7, 1996. i am conducting an interview with samuel beckler. the interview is being conducted in flushing, new york. we are in flushing, new york and we will be conducting the interview in english. please give me your name and the spelling. my name is samuel beckler. i am a professor of english at the university of new york. and what is your name at birth? i am samuel beckler. and when were you born? i was born on the 28th of march, the 3rd. yeah, march 3, 1922. and how old are you? i am 74 years old. and what was the city you were born in? the city was zawiechoszc. zawiechoszc, this is pobiec, zandomiec. in poland? in poland. that's the name of the region. in władzka, there was władzka, kalecki. near which? kalecki. pobiec was like new york queens, you know, queens, new york. and this was zawiechoszc, zandomiec. now that's where your woods were, you know, the elsewhere. it's kalecki, kielce. so how far away was zawiechoszc from kielce? about 20 kilometers. yeah, zawiechoszc to kielce is 20 kilometers. there was other cities too, you know, ostrowcie, ostrowiec. it's about 18 kilometers. ożarów, you know, all the small cities, you know. this was a small city, you know. i got relatives in ostrowcie. how large was zawiechoszc? zawiechoszc was a small city. it was 300 families, maybe 4,000 jewish people. three or four thousand jewish people. they lived in a particular area of zawiechoszc? yeah, jewish, they used to live with the jewish altogether. there is shooting synagogues, libraries in jewish, you know. and the most the jewish altogether. in the polaks, they live different, different. can you please describe the house that you lived in? the house, i was got two rooms, you know. i was, there was a synagogue. the shul was there and i was laying the shul, the glass of the synagogue. ice synagogue was, no, a goyze synagogue. and i was living by the shul. we got there, we rent somebody, you know. and we was living there since i remember, you know. can you tell me about your family? let's start with your father. my father, my father is yosef, yosef bechler. bechler. he was in yiddish, they say, milamid. no, this as in hebrew. he used to teach children hebrew, you know, till himmesh, russia. himmesh, russia, this is the else. after, you know, they go to another, the children, they go to another, bigger. g'mor and toysef is, you know, rambam, you know. he was five years till himmesh, russia, till they 10, 11 years, 11 children. five, 10, 11. and after they went, he was a hebrew teacher. in yiddish, it's milamid, he's my own children. was he a religious man? very, very rich. very rich. i mean, all children. he was five children, you know. all was very religious. it's coming saturday, you know, or friday, even we was poor, you know, all children. they was, that was on the table that we ate. even then there was nothing to eat. all must be, you know, my daughter make kiddish, you know, make rice. almost no, but was respect, was nice. even we was poor, very poor. i remember my father, you know, he was a milamid. a lot of people didn't have money to pay, you know what i'm saying. he learned maybe 30 children with 35 children. where was the shul? he went in the shul. there was a special, you know, in the shul. he took the children and he teach them there. our house was small for so many children. and he teach them there, you know. and though he got pay, you know, maybe 10. ten got pay in 2022, then i got. he worked for nothing. in high, he works, you know, so hard, you know. he works, find the money, you know. when the children was coming, 7 o'clock, my father, he got up 5 o'clock. he went in the shul, and after, you know, the children, they were coming. no, got a hard life. after, my father, when it's finished, you know, he would make more money. he was very reduced. no, when they make weddings, you know, they used to call him, you know, he used to serve. and he used to cut the cake, you know, and he used to serve like a kelner, you know, in a restaurant. he used to serve, he used to make many kind of wedding. and everybody knows, they call, jozlyn lamit, he's come, he served us. this, my father. no, this i can tell you was very poor. my mother got two sisters in england. they sent us, you know, i remember, pizer passover, and she sent us, sickest, sickest. she used to send us money from england, my mama's sister. and this, that is, we survived. that's it. could you tell me a little bit about your mother? what was her name? my mother, dobin, dobin. my mother, she was such a woman, you know. this is the reason, but i can understand. here you have one child, you know, it's so heavy, hard. in there my mother, five children, she used to work everything at home, you know. and she was a sick woman. 12 o'clock at night, she got up, 6 o'clock, 12 o'clock she went to bed. why? she used to like to stricken, you know. so dresses, and i remember my sister, when she got married, they make cushions, you know. so she got goose, goose, you know. i killed the veteran, you know. and she made cushions for my sister. always she was working, always. and here, you know, no machines, no washing, washing, she used to, you know, every month, you know, she went to go there. this is a vassal, they call in jewish, a vassal. and she used to, you know, like they hug, they used to cook, they used to cook the, the clothes in pots, you know, they come. she was always work very hard. and she was, my father died very young, you know, he left all children and he was very young, you know. it was a hard life she got. i remember my grandma, i don't remember my grandma, my grandfather, i remember, no, she used to sell, you know, for they make hallows bread, haven, then gets bigger, they put ist, ist. and she used to sell this, you know, in a lot of women, they put. you mentioned your father died when you were young. how old were you? i was about 11, 12 years i was old when my father died. when my father died, you know, i went to a job, you know, like this i was very religious, very horridocs. i used to wear, you know, i had payalik kat, you know, i was very religious. i went to another teacher, deutel milamed, moshe milamed, you know, bigger. bubimitzim, bubikame, you know, i used to learn the torah, you know. and still, you know, so many years, 56, 70, i never looked and i remember, you know, everything, very religious. when i went away for a job, i went away for a job, you know, commercial macha. commercial macha, i used to, we used to make the top, the top stitching by the machine, you understand. after i made good, i got an uncle. he was family, cousins, he was a blocker, a tinsmith. he used to make roof, roof. and there, when they build houses, they make roofs with tins, you know. and for the voters, they make, you know, the voters, how you call this? grains. yeah, this i used to make and he used to take me. i used to make, you know, he pay me 10 zlotys, 10 zlotys. my mother used to live two, three weeks. ten zlotys, he give me a week, 10 zlotys and i ate there. you know, there was a lot of children, and a lot of children that thought they died. they went away, i got family in lodz, they went away there. my mother, she got a small child, there was two years, you know. and i was meet, meet the child in home. and the old sisters, they went away to lodz. can you tell me about your sisters and your brother? yeah, the sisters. you see the sisters, they went away when, before the war, they was in lodz. they restored by mother. mother was very hard for the children. the family, she got family in lodz, you know. the children, they went there to lodz. now i was meet my younger boy, younger brother, i was there. can you give me the names of your sisters? my sisters is the older sister was matl, matl, matl, matl. like this called. and the second was piel, and i'm the third. and the reason was after me, rose was, oh, this is the sister. and the brother was shaw, shaw. this is, now i got the three sisters. it's matl, piel, rose. what was the difference in age between you and your sisters and brother? about two years, you see, i'm born in 1922. the other sister is born 1925. and the older sister is born in 16, 15 or 1960. in peru, about two years, yeah. and the brother, you know, i know he's born 1932, 1931. my father died at 32, but maybe he was about three years old. when i went away, he was older maybe, yeah. what languages was spoken at home? all yiddish. but out on the street, did you speak yiddish? in the street, yiddish. at the end of my, i see a pollack sometime, you know. i spoke polish, i spoke polish very good. i went to public school too. went to fourth grade. what kind of books and newspapers were in your home? oh, for me books, you know. i got, you know, jules verneuil's, i got max goldkist, i got the russian pushkins, tolstoy's, you know, all yiddish jews. my father, my father allowed me to read his books, you understand. he told me this is not good, this is not good, yiddish. i used to talk in the library in the books. max goldkist, tolstoy's. i was very, since i was 10 years, 11 years, i used to read so many books. i was all translated into yiddish. art, multi-yiddish, even goes a concert. dr. hugo, you know, my parents, i used to read dr. jukas's book, the french writer. i used to read in yiddish, in john valjean with this. i was very interested in reading. i was reading a lot. even here, i used to read, you know, yiddish books, you know. i learned a little english and i read english, you know. you mentioned you attended public school? yeah, public school, fourth class. till what grade did you attend? fourth, fourth. fourth grade. fourth grade. and there were jews and non-jews together? yeah, there was jews and non-jews together. did you experience any anti-semitism in school? oh, yeah. every day when i went to school there, you know, always the pollux, the mosters, always they criticized g.j. parashibi. you are dirty, eat, dirty jew, very, and in every time was fight. this was outside school? just here outside. and after, when we went outside, you know, we got fights. i couldn't stand, you understand, and always, you know, this and i used to fight and they call me, my teacher to come. for me, the teacher, you know, the mom is coming, you know. the teacher sent me away from school, you know. you know, it's, i was right. they right, always was right. when they start this, everything, you understand, was no good. since the war, it's no good. did you have, i'm sorry, did you have any friends that were non-jewish? no friends. just, you know, you know, why? but my uncle, my father, he was a tensmith. he used to go big, you understand. this is the reason i meet them, but i was working with them. they used to work, my uncle used to take the christian, you know, to work for them. and i used to work, too. then i was working with them. yeah, i meet many times, boys, very big antisemitism. since i was, i tell you, since i was six years old, seven years old, always, even my state, you know, i don't buy by the jewish, but the most jewish, they got stores, you understand. they got, they got to drink, how you say, restaurants with schnapps, you know. they go in, and they get coming, and always when they come, it's always fights was there. in bar, they break everything there. now in my state, i was, you know, i tell you, a few boys, you know, they call it bulgurus. you know what's a bulguru? they got horse buggy. wagon driver. and they wait for them, and they go in the yiddish stores or the this, or something, and they make, they a few boys, you know. they, it was quite, they was afraid. not like this, the jewish afraid to go at night. even i was there, you know, to go in this section, the other section, where they, nobody. like, like he was afraid to go and have him in night, this time, you know, this time. like this was there. very, very, very. in this i can tell you, you see, that i feel, you know, what they do, when they do to the jewish, when hitler was come, always, you know what they say before the war. hitler is coming to you, they kill you. before, this was in 1938, when a lot of germans, they run away from germany, and they was coming to poland. my zabiechos, you know, in this, in this is the reason my heart, you know, i know. they built special, why not, i find out, why they built a concentration camp, always in poland. all the concentration camps is in poland, you know. majdanek, auschwitz, and lublin, there is majdanek, you know. why? but the polaks, when hitler came in, then they killed the old jewish, a lot, a lot of them. there was a tanchi cittrabaugh, he got a stove in manufacturing, so they was working, you know. christian, they was working, you know. after when hitler was coming, you know, they killed him. he got a bullet, they cut him off the bullet, and they took over the stove. this was in the first week, the first week when i was there, you know. in the beginning, they took over, they took over the stove, not the germans, the polak, they took over all the soars and everything. let me bring you back a little bit, because we're jumping ahead a little too far now. about yourself, what, were you interested in sports when you were young? in sports, yeah, i used to play, you know, soccer, i used to play. by every organization, you know, draw, guitar, you know, the thing is, we got a game, you know. i used to play back, front back, you know, soccer, we used to play. yeah, i was interested. so these sports events were just played with other jews? yeah, with other jews, not all jewish. and you mentioned different organizations. yeah. were you in any particular organization? i used to belong to jewish organization, dror, dror abunim, this one. and my sister used to belong to ilgan zwila'um beitar, they used to, you know. i got all this discussion with her. she told me, she told me, i'm, you know, shem do you remember any other jewish zionist organization? yeah, mizrahi, there was mizrahi, there was, i tell you, gordonia, yeah, gordonia, oh, oh, oh. gordonia, buddhist, even communist, communist, it's not allowed there. poland was, no, there was, i forget the name. which was the most popular? which had the largest following? the bund, budnist. this was the gesta, this working party. maybe you hear, zieglbaum, when poland was, they killed, he went to england, they did not believe him. he went to england, zieglbaum, he was a budnist, he was in senate. a eid, no, he was a senator, he was a budnist, he was, you don't believe me, he went to england, you understand, and he told, they killed jewish, they, nobody safe, they don't believe him. you know, he took a gun, zieglbaum, and killed himself, now he believe him. this was... and you, your father passed away before you were bar mitzvahed, were you bar mitzvahed? no, yeah, bar mitzvahed, after my father passed away. you were bar mitzvahed then? yeah, i got bar mitzvahed, yes, it, my father passed away, i was, i tell you, 11 or 12 years, i never got bar mitzvahed. and it was after, i remember, my uncle, i got the uncle in the road, and he took me on the show, you know, put the trailer, say, and i got bar mitzvahed. do you remember any social events that took place in zavokos, any plays or concerts that you recall? there was, yeah, there was, the organizations, the tzinnistas organizations, they make, the groups, you know, they used to play all, all this. they used to play, my brother joseph, 11 brothers, you know, joseph, the brothers, they used to play, they used to play, and sure, my life was a lot, sure, a lot, a lot, a lot concert they make. they rent and all, all jewish they went there to make, you know, all organizations they used to make, pick up and they used to play. yeah, it was very cultural, boy, so small, no, so cultural, you know, but it was everything, everything was there. stibalich, you know, from the government, from the organization, from libraries, libraries are such libraries there, you know how many libraries there was? four in such a small city. you know, that's it, it was such a public take, it's public take, library. you mentioned that you had peyas, did you consider yourself hasidic? yeah, i was very, not hasidic like this, no, i was oredox, very oredox, no, no fleishik, i never, never in my life, never. where did you daven? i remember my zaydah when i was alive, it took me, the stiblach, you know what, stiblach, small, but they belong to the rabbi, hasidim. my zaydah used to belong to rabbi menashev, he was urquefa rabbi menashev, he was, you know, i say agape, i don't say in english, you know agape, he used to, you see, the most religious woman, if they don't have children, they go to the rabbi, the rabbi winch them, that they went to the rabbi, and my grandfather used to write, used to write, oh, you can go in this time, in this time, in this time to the rabbi, you understand. this is agape with the rabbi. you mentioned the rabbi named menashev? yeah, rabbi menashev. where was he from? he was raised in polish, and he got a son, he got a son, he was a rabbi, a rabbi, a roof in mindset, zabichos, moishal horvitz. he was a rabbi, he was a rabbi, he was a rabbi, this was brothers, you know. he was in ostravts, ostravts, they all, the most finjeshuv, the most finjeshuv, you know, and this was a ksiden. the maizayd took me always in them shtibalot, shtibalot, this is as i assume, for the ksiden, like lubavitcha, there is a trust lubavitcha, in there, they used to be like, everybody got, you know, this was ksiden. so i, we was very orthodox, even i got the sister, my sister, you know, so respect, there was alternate, so respect my father, i remember after children, you know, he was laying down, he was sending a chindenet, quiet, my father's sleeping, understand. mr. bechler, we're going to stop now to change the tape. alright. thank you. thank you.