mr. bechler, we're talking about religious observance. do you remember celebrating the high holidays? oh, yeah. sure. i remember. i should tell you. please. let's come and hear you. you know, my father, but the religious before the hour, you know, he went all the way to shore. now, the air of the young kid, you know, he got a kitten, you know, a cat-loon, you know, this event there. and i remember he took me there to another, the rest children. you know, i went there. and they prayed, you know, this was the high holidays. in burpee was young. i remember we, i think, water, i think the kids, you know, three, five years old, nobody, no, this, they never give us a drink water. this is very early on, kip. you know, who wants, you know, i pass, i pass, i remember my mother gave me, you know, in the shoe, i met the father in shoe. and she gave me a piece of hollum, a flea gala, you know, chicken, that, and, no, i tell you, i believe, later, but at 12 o'clock, he gave me a, you know, i ate, you know, like this, when i got bigger, you understand? so, yeah, i was fast and always, even now i'm not so at least, you know, young kip. you see, even, i know, it's not religious now, i pass. now, the rabbi, rabbi menasha, he would come in for high holidays. he come in for the most high holidays. it's not all holidays, you know, but the rabbi, a lot of them, they go to jesu, raishin. now the most they come to high holidays, they're in them, steeba. in this steeba, what they have are small, you know, it's small. the event only in shoe, the other, the other cd in shoe, the shoe can go a few hundred people in shoe, that event, yeah, many times he was coming there. you mentioned the hasidam went to visit the rabbi. do you remember any occasions where your father or perhaps grandfather traveled to the rabbi for advice? my grandfather, my grandfather was there always. my grandfather was met rabbi together in russia. he was in zavihros, since he gave me this, rabbi men and he was younger, he used to get, you know, he used to get, you know, to make paint, paint in stones. this is such a fabric for a burning stones, a god stones, a bottle of fire in the, in the stones, they make the white paint. he used to get, he used to get boots, you know, he rent, they used to burn the, enough that the sun took over, used to dry, tuck in, and so it took. the sun died. my grandfather died, no, the sun was together met my, met my anxiety, you know, this, after he used to real estate, he used to my anxiety, you know, that's not when he went to the rabbi, he gave us all the sun. the sun got four sun, in the sun that was working, the fabric, in the stone. and i used to go from my city zavihros, ozorov, chmeliv, skarsisko, ultimate fait, again, and give the stuff that they, you know, they say that, i believe it. it's my, my, my, my, my brother. this is make a living. he used to live in a nice house. what happened, you know what happened to the rabbi? okay, got killed, he was alive. and i went away, he was alive, he died. they killed him. no, horrible. a lot of pro-him was a rabbi minash amr, a lot of pro-him. a lot of pro-him. he died, he died before, he died before, no, rabbi minash amr, he went away. like everybody, they killed him. in my city was the sun, motion. we went when the war started. all jewish, they went to the market, you know, in travmeta rabbi. a lot, they won't go away. the rabbi told me, no, don't go. don't go to the rabbi, you know. it's not that even it's coming, you know, nobody believes, nobody believes. this is the reason. if it might stay down, nobody will. i mean. well, how aware were you of events that were taking place in germany before the war? before the war? before the war? did you know what was going on in germany? i know. of course. i know why i know. a lot, they come up from germany in 1938, they told, they went to poland, they went all over, you know, but they run away. they know, they told me it's very bad. it was not good. this is the reason why we run away. german jewish, you understand. this is the reason there was christian night, they told us, you understand? you remember? yeah. i remember. i know i couldn't find out, even i was in russian, i was coming home. then i know, i know, meet nobody. for my family, i stay in russian. you know why? well, i couldn't believe, you know, all got killed. when i was coming home, you know, everybody, they told me. they took away from the arse, they took away the jewish, they killed them, not from eight kilometers, because of isis. this you found out when? this i found out when i was coming, 1946. this is the reason i was coming from russian to see the family. i couldn't believe, i mean, maybe i find somebody, a sister, a this. you know, i couldn't find out. let's go back a little bit, come and ask you about that. yeah. you're after war experiences. but do you remember what you did and how you felt on september 1, 1939, when the war broke out? yeah. oh, yeah. my mother told me, you see, it's like this, i should go away. in the only children, they wasn't lost. you know, when the first start, they was coming back from the lodge to the mother. it was all together, you know. and after my mother told me, you go away, i said, you know, i can live you. no, no. after my friends come, you go away, you see what they took, they take the most to work where they say that you should go. you should go away from the samels, you know. we don't know. we don't know. they make half russian this, we don't know. we just run away when it was very bad. you know. and i was there two weeks, i think, three weeks. i don't remember. it took us to work. when did the nazis first command to zavikost? in september. first september, the second september. they were there on the yeah. i was the second, the third, but two, three weeks after they took all women in this talk work, the work, you know. this straits, you know, this straits everything. in this there is a way, run away. this was in the night, i remember, but two weeks, three weeks. you ran away two weeks after? yeah. tell me about the first two weeks. how did life change? oh, the life change. the two weeks when i run away, i saw. on the road, i left run away, you understand? in the germans, with the 36 planes, you know, the shot of the people, you know. the polymers, you know, a lot of kilo horses, the wegmann wagons, you know. very bad, very bad. all the road, all the road, you should see when they killed them. in the plane, in the shot, in the, i went away, i went to skarsisk, not skarsisk, krasnik, lubelsk, all state out there. and janoff lubelsk, you know, in there, we run, we run, we run, we run, we run away, but the rabbi there was, we were coming friday night. i remember they used to give us, hallelujah, fish, you know, we run away. a lot, a lot is sitting in janoff lubelsk, you know. we don't know where everyone, we run away. you just ran. i just ran. what did you take with you? i just like, got nothing. who did you run away with? who did you run away with? me friends. a lot. three friends. three friends. i got, no, there wasn't the road, a lot. we meet. we love together, you understand? you see, i don't know, i don't know. three friends, i got good friends when i was in school, you know, when i had the picture stuck in the, in the run away, on god kill. the rest of your family, your younger brother and your sisters. stay, stay, stay home. stay, stay home. my mother, you first me, you know, gosh, me, go, go, go. in iran, in after, let me tell you, i won't go back. i was crying. i was 17 years old. i was crying and i won't go back. i told myself, i, i, i live, my mother was sick, you know, she, very, very, very, very things, you know. you know, in iran, go back. i couldn't go back. i was fired all over the others. you know, we went, we went till visit for power. i remember after, oh, we was, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, after crushing, crushing, i got family, they give me a, a few dollars. i should go away. and they went to other places. and then i went to the panook, right in the body. i see a snow place, no nothing quite. and i don't know what's this is. how did you get there? i walk. we walk in. a lot of the gut, horses, bugged, horses, no cars. they took us. how long did it take? oh, took me a, a two weeks, three weeks. but three weeks took four weeks. three weeks was coming. you know, i see quiet after i find out the russian there. it's a lot, a lot that, that, you know, foreign, you know, that, you know, foreign, foreign, polish, yeah, in the russian kingdom, polish, polish, polish will tear. then the russian, then they run away to the polish. you know, i don't know if it's, it's not jewish. there wasn't a polish army. no, they run away to, you understand? in the, in the russian kingdom, the other, what they went there, the, the scallest, polish clothes, you know, meter than this, after a lot, they went to jewish. they give them a jacket. they change. they change this. they, they, they, they, in, in, in, in i wasn't, they, they, japan ukraine, the rovna. in the russian, in rovna. in rovna. in this russian occupied area. yeah. did you have to protect? did you hide your jewish identity? no, no, no, no. that was jewish. that was jewish. you know, i, i, i went three brothers. they was, you know, i'm telling, i have a jewish, run away from who he took me inside. goose, me, goose, i never forget all brothers. and they told me, maybe you were from me. he used to sell, you know, wheat, and fabric, you know, flour, everything, you know, the store find. enough day. every day, you need to take a day, you need to take a day, you know, they must register in, you know, you must. the i register to go home. who wants to go home? they can go home. no? i register to have a go home. you know, when i register to go home, that they send me to siberia. why would you pick to go to siberia? i, they pick. they, they, russian. i mean. what were the circumstances that they picked you? just. not me. they picked you. everybody who was, but i went go home. i went go home to my mother, you know, i know i, i left mother, you know, i mean, i couldn't go, i couldn't go. the, the, by the i register to go home. that they said that's the siberia in our common mind. we are in siberia. no, but it's a bierce. no, but it's a bierce in the common, you know, this like, i wish my, i wish my death, you know, my death. we used to work there, eight now in the common mind, no food. they got 600 gram bread a day is this, the bread was like a stone, you know. go on, a little bit. he used to work with a little she, she, what it was, a little bother with a sort of people. in this you work for them, 50 miles in the common mind, you know, in every day in the common mind, you know, when they take the calling, they put holes in that put dynamite holes down in the calling, you know, a lot that every day, eight people, ten people got killed in the calling mind. and i was the 18 months in the calling mind. i tell you, no, home get, home get in this. i tell you, no, i must go in the army, kill a few germans, you know, in the common, i mean, like this, and took me a, you know, long from eight months, you know. this was every day. every day, every day, and i used to work, you know. in the home get, i remember i went to the doctor, you know, i couldn't work to the ook, you know. i couldn't work, you know, i couldn't ook, you know. they hit me, they said, i should, but i couldn't, you know, till i have an owl took, you know. i got this, and they i used to. i was less than the stuff, you know, less than the stuff, you know. i used to carry big beans. then they take the calling, you know, they hold it, you know, you know. no, there was gas, there was the, i think in mind, my, my, my life is, is all death together. you understand, it's better to go in the army, you know. i wrote as i have a lenin, as i have a lenin. i would go in the, in the army. well, how did you have the opportunity to enlist in the russian army? well, you were 15, 18 hours and they told us, who once got to the army, can go to the army. that i wrote as i have a lenin, you know, took three months. they said i should go to bersk in the, in the punk. when they learned after, after matt, the rifle, you know, in i went there in 1942. i remember they said, in state, state, study, i wasn't selling a film bersk. i learned, and after we learned, i was an engineer, engineer pantone, bridget. you know, we used to build, we used to build on the vulgar water, the bridges, you know. pantone, you know. we built the kachosha vent, the tanks went, and after we take apart, we built the manana. what was the name, do you remember the name of the unit that you were in? six of five, six of five pantone, pantone, engineer. so you had six of five folk, this i remember. and the work you were doing were to build on the tones. in there was ulk, no. i, i, i, i, i, i, i know careful my dad. food i got, what got, every day he should see. spirit they give. you know what? spirit? yeah. this was, we went in, in, in, and after this, where they built the bridge in the night, you know, we cut boots. the boots for the, for the bridge. it was ulk, day and night. now there was food, this, the nina cave had the death. you know, a lot got killed, then they built. you should see the planes, the german planes, you know. so where was this? which battles were- stalingrad. stalingrad? stalingrad, this, this wasn't southern. yeah. oh. yeah. and when you were in the russian army, did they, the people you worked with, did they know of your jewish identity? yeah. they know. i told him to be brave. i never did. then i was afraid. did you experience any anti-semitism in the russian army? you see, when i was, there was, yeah, in the corner of my ukraines. not russian. ukraines. but they were, they were big anti-semitism. they, he killed so many, they, in the corner of my, in the corner of my ukraines. i feel killed. i mean, he killed, cherub of his, his name. he told me many times now i was a good worker. he told me, you, you, you, you, you know, this is natural. you, you, you, you, you know, this is a cherub of other ukraines and you, you, you, you, you. you eat. oh, yeah. there was no, you see, but stalin. maybe he was a communist. no, there was a russian people alone, it was good people. a lot of times how much they give me a potato, you know, i used to do a job for them, you know, cutting hay for this, by russian. every family, they got the, a cow, chickens, you understand, this was. now there was a, i won't poo, you know, there was good russian people was good. not the governmental, you know, even there was a election i remember, you know, i, i, i couldn't work. i never, this time this was a rush. while you were there, did you maintain your observance of judaism? no, ten of us. and i was there, i was looking all over the old clothes, old synagogues, big synagogues, there was old clothes. oh, there is nothing. even i find i remember there was, after the world, yeah, after the world, i find such a religious people, you know, we got sinners, you know, with peace. this after the world, then i, then i find, they got stevelock, you know, how you say, nobody know, they, they, you know, they said, okay, this was in, as i understand, i think this, for they was religious, jewish, a lot they got malle, you know, they got everything, you know, that this was a, for the government, they was a player for the government, that they got. so while you were in the russian army, you encountered jews in russia? eh? you encountered, you met jews living in russia? yeah, yeah, i got a, a, a, a, a, a general, he was a jew. he was, yeah, you know, he served, was so good, you know, he turned up. this is, he gave me a lot of bread of this, yeah, a lot of communiques was in russia, that i was a minor platoon, you know, was the gunner, the gunner, my, you know, he was, a general, a lot, a very big, was good to me. every time he fights me, no. did you, while you were in russia, did you know what was going on in poland? no. what about the news of the war? was there any news that you received? i never know. it's this, never. you see, no papers, no radio. we never, we never believe. and i know, i tell you, but i know it's like this, i've never come home. i've been saying this. you know why? i used to go meet a jewish, get in their specter, after the war, you know, and i used to love the father was, i say, oh, it's something. nice, nice family. they had got two sons in the army, you know, every friday they invite me, you know, you see him, bake colors, she bake this. i was close, you know, after i was coming, was coming, who once got to poland, back. but, general škorsk, the polish, who once, who was born in poland, they came back to poland. this is the reason i went back to poland. why? i couldn't believe, you know, my family got killed. did you go in with the russian army into poland, or the end of the war? no, no, not materaszhar. i went to the cello. well, when did your military send? i was in 1946. the end of 1945, i was in the hospital. yeah, you know, i'm one that twice. how do you get one? materaszhar, materaszhar, after the shot. where? when? in the back. this was in 1942, 1943. yeah. what part of russia? where was this? this was in stalingrad, but the bridges. but you built the bridges, you know, the shut. and i got one that. this was in 1943 or 1944. i was in the hospital in stalingrad, and then to the war. so the end of the war? yeah. after then, when they released me, no more war. were you given a medal because you wounded? i got, you know, a passport to go in the restaurants. and the restaurants to eat there, you know, to eat lunch. this i got till i went home. so when you went home, you were already out of uniform. you turned as a civilian. of course. yeah. this i went home. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe you know. i can find nobody. you see, this is very... so you returned directly to zavakost? yeah. correct? correct? then i was coming up. the peace state zavakost? no jewish. no nobody. polak. the term that i asked for my teachers, you know, public school. i remember, you know, sabetsky, you know, they told me he's alive in the term that he lives. he was living on another side. and i went to him. i went to him. he told me it's such a nice... you see? a lot of polaks, he was so good. give me a eatin, give me a money, tell me schmulik. go ston'twah. there was pogromen. there was benai, there in 1946. there was the pogromen kalits. they killed 150 people. that was the time you were in zavakost. this is the time i was in zavakost. was there any... 46. actions against jews in zavakost at that time? i couldn't stay. i was a day there. i was by hinolet miko. but there was such a... when they see a jew, you understand, they killed it. so it was very dangerous for you. very dangerous. this is the reason he gave me a money, tell me go away. where i went, i went austria. well, before we get there, let me ask you. how did you discover what happened to your family? who told you? somebody told me that, you know. and they described what happened in 1943. yeah, 1943, somebody told me that in zavakost, you know, the teacher, sabetsky, in others, you know. what did they tell you? they took out the jewish and they killed them. in zavakost, in shtaytah, they killed them because of it. eight kilometers. do they say who participated? they say a lot. pollocks. they must pollocks. pollocks help the... pollocks help the nonsense. pollocks help the nonsense. pollocks help the nonsense. in the executions? yeah. the most pollocks. this is the reason i can't stand that. there was a picture. they had jewish. there was a picture with him. he saved a lot of jewish. you know why he saved jewish? he could make no more money. there was a shindles list. shindles list, you understand? like this. no. he said, pais saved. but they gave gold and this and everything he understands. but he couldn't... was ended the world soon, you understand? he took them to work here. no, he saved akha, a thousanders for this. but not like this he was the same nazi like everybody. we're going to stop here to change the tapes right now.