My name is Manuel Bekier. Today is November 7, 1996. I am conducting an interview with Samuel Bekler. The interview is being conducted in Flushing, New York. My name is Manuel Bekier. Today it November 7, 1996. I'm conducting an interview Samuel Bekler. We're in Flushing, New York. And-- and we'll be conducting the interview in English. English. Please give me your name and the spelling. It's spelled-- my name is Samuel Bekler, S-A-M-U-E-L Bekler, B-E-K-L-E-R. And what is your name at birth? Bekler. And when were you born? I'm born in 28th of March, the 3rd, yeah. March 3, 1922 in Zawichost. And how old are you? How old are you? I'm 74 years. And what was the city you were born in? The city was Zawichost. Zawichost, this is Powiat Sandomierz. In Poland? In Poland. It's called Powiat Sandomierz. That's the name of the region. In there was Kielce. Now which-- Kielce. Powiat was like, New York, Queens, you know. Queens, New York. And this was Zawichost Sandomierz, You know, the it's Kielce, Kielce. Kielce? Yeah. How far away was Zawichost from Kielce? About 20 kilometer. Yeah. From Zawichost to Kielce, it's 20-- about 20 kilometer. And there was other cities too, you know-- Ostrowiec, Ostrowiec, it's about 18 kilometer. Ozarow, you know, all the small cities, you know. And this was a small city, you know. We got-- I got relatives in Ostrowiec. How large was Zawichost? Zawichost was small city. It was-- is was about 300 families, maybe 4,000-- 4,000 Jewish people, 3,000 or 4,000 Jewish people. They lived in a particular area of Zawichost? Yeah, Jewish they used to live, meet the Jewish all together. Why? There is shul, synagogues, libraries in Jewish, you know. And the most Jewish all together, and the Polacks they live different, a different area. Can you please describe the house that you lived in? Oh, I was got two rooms, you know? I was-- there was a-- the synagogue, the shul was there. And I was-- leading the shul. The the Our synagogue was no synagogue. And I was living by the shul. We got there, and we rent. Somebody-- we rent with somebody, you know. And we was living there since I remember, you know, he was. Anyway. Can you tell me about your family? Let's start with your father. What was his name? My father-- my father is Joseph. Joseph. Joseph Bekler, or B-E-K, Bekler. He was in Yiddish, they say melamed. Now this as in Hebrew. He used to teach children Hebrew, you know, till this is after, you know, they-- they go to another-- the children they got to another, bigger, Gemara, and you know, you know. He was when four year five years till till they turn 11 years. 11, children from five to 11. And after they went to the bigger. He was a-- a Hebrew teacher. In Yiddish it's the melamed, small children. I-- Was he a religious man? Very religious, very religious. I mean all children were-- we was five children, you know. And all was very religious. It's coming Saturday, you know, or Friday, even if we was poor, you know, all children they was-- there was on the table, and we ate, even dinner was nothing to eat. Oh, it must be, you know. But might have to make a kiddish, and make matzah, and all was respect was nice. Even we was poor, very poor, I-- I remember my father, you know, he was a melamed. Then a lot of people didn't have money to pay. You know what I'm saying? He let maybe 30 children with 35 children. Where was the shul? He went in the shul. There was a special, you know, in the shul. He took the children in, and he teach them there. Our house was small for so many children, yes. And he teached them till and he got paid, you know, maybe 10, 10 got paid, and 20 and 22 they not got-- he worked for nothing. And how he works, you know, he-- so hard, you know. We works you know when the children was coming at 7 o'clock, my father, he got a private work. We rented the shul, and daven, and after, you know, in the kinder-- the children when they were coming and-- and No, we got-- got a hard life. After my father when-- when it's finished, you know, what makes more money, he was very Orthodox, you know, when they make weddings, you know. They used to call him, you know. He used to serve. And he used to cut the cake, you know, and he used to serve like a-- a you know, in a restaurant. He used to serve. He used to make money for the wedding. And everybody knows they call Joseph Melamed, he come, he serves us. And that's my father. No, no this I can tell you, we was very poor. Now, my mother got two sisters in England. They sent us, you know, I remember Pesach, Passover, and she sent us sikkas. She used to us money from England, my mom's sister. And this is the reason why we survived. That's-- That's the reason why. Could you tell me a little bit about your mother? What was her name? My mother, Doba, Doba. My mother, she was such the woman, you know. This is a reason why I can't understand here you have one child, you know, is so heavy And there my mother, you-- five children, she used to work everything at home, you know. And-- and she was a sick woman. 12 o'clock at night, she got up 6 o'clock. 12 o'clock she went to night-- to bed. Why? She used to like-- like to you know, sew dresses. And I remember my sister, when she got married, they make cushions, you know. She got goose, gooses, you know. I-- I killed the You know, and she make cushions for-- for-- for my sister. Always she was working, always. And here, you know, no-- no machines, no washing, washing, she used to, you know, every month you know, she went to water. This is a They call in Jewish a vessel. It's-- and she used to, you know, like they hack the wash. And they used to cook. They used to cook the-- the clothes in pots, you know, they come in. And she was always work very hard. And she was-- and my father died very young, you know. And he left all children, and they was very young, you know. And that's a hard life she got. I remember my grandma-- I no remember my grandma. My grandfather I remember. Now she used to sell, you know, how you-- what they make, challahs bread, haven, when it gets bigger, they put yeast, yeast. And she used to sell this, you know. And a lot of woman, they bought-- You mentioned your father died when you were young. How old were you? I was about 12, 11, 12 years I was old when my father died. And when my father died, you know, I went to-- to a job, you know. I guess I was very religious, very Orthodox. I used to wear, you know, a hat, payot, kippah, you know. I was very religious. I went to another teacher, to Melamed, Moshe Melamed, you know, bigger. you know. I used to learn the Torah, you know. And still, you know, so many years, 56 I never look, and I remember, you know, everything. Very religious. Now, when I went away there for a job, I went away for a job, in commercial Commercial, I used to-- we used to make the top, the top stitch by the machine, you understand? Of shoes. After by my-- after I don't make good. I got an uncle. He was family, and cousins. He was a a tinsmith. He used to make roofs, roofing. And there, in Poland when they build houses, they make roofs with tins, you know. And-- and for the border, they making, you know, the-- the water-- Drains. How you call this? Drains. Yeah. This I used to make, and he used to take me. I used to make, you know, he pay me 10 zlotys. 10 zlotys, my mother used to live two, three weeks with 10 zlotys he give me a week. 10 zlotys, and I ate there. You know, we was a lot of children. And a lot of children, the died. They went away. I got family in Lodz. So they went away there. And my mother, she got a-- a small child. There was about two years, you know. And I was middle-- middle child in home. And the old sisters, they went away to Lodz. Could you tell me about your sisters and your brother? Yeah, the sisters, you see the sisters, they went away when-- when-- before the war they was in Lodz. They-- my mother was very hard for the children. The family, she got family in Lodz, you know, the children they went there, you know, to Lodz. Now I was with my younger boy-- younger brother, I was there. You know? Could you tell me the names of your sisters? My sisters? Is the oldest sister was Martel, Martel. Yeah, that called. And the second was Pola. And I'm the third. And Roza was after me, Rose was the sister. And the brother was Shaul, Shaul. This is-- now I got the three sisters. It's Martel, Pola, Roza. What was the difference in age between you and-- In age. In age with me-- --your other sisters and brother? About two years. You see, I'm born in 1922. The other sister is born in 1925. And the oldest sister is born in '16-- 1915 or 1916. Yeah. And Pola, about two years. And the brother, you know, I know he's born in 1932, or '31. My father died about '32. Then maybe he was about three years old. And went I went away, we was older maybe, yeah. You know. What language was spoken at home? All Yiddish. But out on the street, did you speak Yiddish? In the street, Yiddish. I see I Polack sometime, you know, yeah. You know, I spoke Polish. I spoke Polish really good. You know? I went to public school, too. I went four grade. What kind of books and newspapers were in your home? Oh, me and books, you know? I got, you know, Jules Verne. I got Max I got the Russian Pushkins, Tolstoys, you know, all Yiddish, just I. My father, my father, no allowed me to read these books, you understand? He told me this is smut. This is no good. They Yiddish. Now I used to took them from the library, the books. Max I used to read Tolstoys. I was very, since I was 10 years, 11 years, I used to read so many books. It was all translated into Yiddish? All to Yiddish, all-- all to Yiddish. Even Goethe, Dr. Hugo, Hugo, you know? Maybe it's-- I used to read-- I used to read Dr. Hugo's books, the French writer. I used to read in Yiddish. And Jean Valjean with this-- it was very interesting in reading. I was reading a lot. Even here I used to read, you know, Yiddish books, you know. After I learn a little English, and I read English, you know. You mentioned you attended public school? Yeah, I public school four-- four class. Till what grade did you attend? Four, four. Fourth grade. Fourth grade. And there were Jews and non-Jews together? Yeah. There was Jews and non-Jews together. Did you experience any antisemitism in school? Oh, yeah. Every day when I went to school there, you know, always the Polacks, the most, they always they criticized you are dirty. Eat, ah, dirty Jew. Very anti-- and every time was fights. This was outside school? Just, yeah, outside. And after when we went outside, you know, we got fights. Me-- I couldn't stand it. You had to stand it, but always, you know, this. And I used to fight. And they called me my tata should come. Family, the tata, you know, the mama is coming, you know. The teacher send me away from school, you know. You know, it's-- I never was right. They-- they right, always was right. But they start this everything, kids and no. It was no good. Since the war, no good. Did you have-- I'm sorry-- did you have any friends that were non-Jewish? No friends, just we know. You know. Why? By my uncle, my father, he was a tinsmith. He used to big. You understand? this is the reason I meet them. But I was working with them. They used to work, my uncle used to take the Christian, you know, to work for them. And I used to work too then. I was working with them. Yeah, I meet many times, no, always was very big antisemitism. Since I was-- I tell you-- since I was six years old, seven years old, always even my shtetl, you know, don't buy by the Jewish. The most Jewish, they got stores, you understand. They got-- they got to drink-- how you say-- restaurants with schnapps, you know. The goyims would they would come in. And always when they come in, there's always fights was there. In bar, they break everything. Now in my shtetl, it was real-- I tell you a few boys, you know, become You know what's a They got horse buggy. A wagon driver. Yeah. And they wait for them. And they go in the Yiddish stores, or the days when there's something, and they make-- they a few boys, you know. They-- then I was quiet. Then I was afraid. Now like this, the Jewish afraid to go at night, even I was there, you know, to go in this section, the other section where they-- nobody. Like-- like here is afraid to go in Harlem in night this time. You know, this time, like this was that. Now very, very, very-- And-- and this I can tell you. You see, what I feel is, you know, what they do, what they do to the Jewish when Hitler was come, always, you know what they say before the war, Hitler is coming to you, and they kill you. And this, by Polacks. This was in 1938, when a lot of Germans, they run away from Germany, and they was coming to Poland, by you know. And this, of course antisemitism. And this is the reason in my heart, you know, I know they built special. Why-- now I-- I find out why they built the concentration camp always in Poland. All the concentration camp is in Poland, you know. Majdanek, Auschwitz, and-- in Lublin there is Majdanek. You know why? Well, the Polacks, when Hitler came in, then they killed all Jewish, a lot-- a lot of them. There was He got a store, a manufacturing store. They was working, you know, a Christian there was working, you know. After, when Hitler was coming, you know, they killed him. He got a beard, and they cut off the beard, and they took over the stores. This was in the first week, the first week when I was there, you know, and-- and they came and they took over-- they took over the store. Not the Germans. The Polack, they took over all the stores and everything. Let me bring you back a little bit. Because we're jumping ahead a little too far now. About yourself, what-- were you interested in sports when you were young? In sports, yeah. I used to play, you know, soccer I used to play. Why? For every organization, you know, Dror or Betar, you know, the Zionists. We got a game, you know. I used to play back, front back, you know, soccer we used to play. Yeah. I was interested. So these sports events were just played with other Jews? Yeah, with other Jewish-- not-- all Jewish it was. And you mentioned different organizations. Yeah. Were you in any particular organization? I used to belong to Zionist organization, Dror, Dror Habonim, this one. And my sister used to belong to Betar, they used to. You know, I got always discussion with her about it. She told me-- she told me I'm-- you know, Socialism, no, not Communism. You know the democracy. We got always discussions about this that we used to fight, with the discussions we used to fight over. So. What other organizations were in Zawichost? Do you remember any other Jewish Zionist organizations? Yeah, the Mizrahi. There was Mizrahi. There was-- I-- I tell you-- Gordonia. Gordonia, oh all the Gordonia, Bundists, even Communists. Communists, it's not allowed there. In Poland it was not-- no there was there. Which was the most popular? Which had the largest following? The Bund-- Bundists. This was the followers, it was the working party. Yeah. Maybe you hear of-- Zygielbojm. When Poland was in the-- they kill, he went to England. They did not believe him. We went to England, Zygielbojm, we was a Bundist. He was in Senate-- no he wasn't Senator. He was a Bundist. He was, you don't believe me, so he went to England. You understand? And then he told, they killed Jewish there. Why nobody save? They don't believe him. You know, he took a gun, Zygielbojm, and-- and killed himself. No, they didn't believe him. This was-- When you-- your father passed away before you were bar mitzvah'd. Were you-- were you bar mitzvah'd? No, but yeah, bar mitzvah after, when my father passed away. You were bar mitzvah'd then? Yeah, I got bar mitzvah'd, yes. Yeah, my father passed away. I was-- I tell you, 11 or 12 years. And never got bar mitzvah'd. And it was after. I remember my uncle. I got an Uncle Rosen, and took me in shul, you know. Put the and say And I got bar mitzvah'd. Do you remember any social events that took place in Zawichost, any plays or concerts that you recall? Yeah. There was-- yeah, there was the organizations, here the Zionist organizations they make with the groups, you know, they used to play all-- all this. They used to play Joseph. Joseph, with the brother, a lot of brothers, you know. Joseph, the brothers, this they used to play. They used to play all Jew, and a lot, and a lot-- a lot-- a lot concerts they make. They rent, and all-- all Jewish they went there to make, you know. All the organizations they used to make, pick a band, and they used to play. Yeah. You know, it was very cultural. Boy, so-- so small. No, so cultural, you know. It was everything. Everything was there. you know and the in the organization, and Labors. Labors-- is such a-- Labors there. You know how many Labors there was? Four in such a small city. And I said, was I says like that. You mentioned you had payot. Yeah. Did do consider-- would you consider yourself Hasidic? Yeah, I was-- I was very-- not-- not Hasidic like this. No, I was Orthodox, very Orthodox. No-- no flashy kind of-- no, never in my life, never. Where did you daven? Daven in shtiebel. I remember my zeyde, when he was alive, he took me at You know what shtiebel, small? But they belong to the rabbi. I see them. My-- my zeyde used to belong to a Rabbi He was working for Rabbi He was, you know, I say I don't-- I don't say in English. You know, but used to, you see, the most religious woman, if they no have children, they go to the rabbi. The rabbi them, that they went to the rabbi. And my grandfather used to write, used to write-- oh, you can go in this time, in this time, in this time to the rabbi. Do you understand? This is the rabbi. You mentioned the rabbi named Yeah, Rabbi Where was he from? Russia, Russia in Polish is Russia, this it's And he got-- he got a son. He got a son. He was a rabbi, Rabbi in my city, Zawichost, Moshe he's Rabbi now he was in-- was in my city, Zawichost. It was or the brother, Rabbi and Rabbi This was brothers, you know. He was in Ostrowiec, and they open the the You know, and this was, Though my zeyde took me always in the shtiebel. Shtiebel, this is our shul for the the other. Like there is-- in there. And it used to be like everybody got, you know, this-- this was Now I-- we was very Orthodox. Even I got this sister, my sister, you know, show respect. They was older than I, and so respect my father. I remember after cholent, you know, he was laying down. And we were so many children. Oh, shh. Quiet, my father is asleep, you understand. Well, Mr. Bekler, we're gonna stop now to change the tape. All right.