........................................................ and what is your name at birth? shmir shmir shmir becler and when were you born? i'm born in 28th of marriage the third yeah, march 3rd, 9th, 22 and how are you? i'm the seventh of her years and what was the city? you were born in shtavas zavirhost zavirhost is probably at sandomesh in poland i'm in poland this girl, this girl, probably at sandomesh that's the name of the region if i was a woods where i was, where i was, where i was, where i was kalejzke near which, where i was, where kalejzke probably at was like new york queens, you know queens, new york and this was zavirhost sandomesh not the way your woods were, you know, the elsewhere it's kalejzkelt kalejzkelt so how far away was zavirhost from kalejzkelt but when you kill a method i think it's kalejzkelt but when you kill a method there was other cities, you know, aströyitz, aströyitz it's all by 18 kalejmed, aśarruf you know, all the small cities, you know this was aströyitz, you know we got, i got the relatives in aströyitz and then, how large was zavirhost? zavirhost was a small city, was a 300 families maybe a 4,000, 4,000 jewish people three or 4,000 jewish people they lived in a particular area of zavirhost jewish, they used to live mid-jewish they used to wear the vibe, they used to wear the and i was led to the justice in aghrzejnag i was in aghrzejnag, in aghrzejnag in aghrzejnag, live in badashöy we got there, virent somebody, you know, somebody, you know in vivas living there, since i remember you know and you tell me about your family, let's start with your father my father is yosuf, yosuf, becla becla, becla he was in yiddish, they say, in milamid this, as in hebrew he used to teach children, hebrew, you know they don't have a jewish, they have a jewish this is the else after, you know they got to another, the children, they got to another they got to another, bigger, the more in the place of his you know, rambo, you know he was, in four years, five years till, from the russian till, they, 10, 11 years 11, children, 15, 10, 11 and after they went, the biggest it was a, i hate to teach her he said, he, this is a milamid when i was in smad, children was he religious? very rich! very rich! i mean, all children he was five children, you know all was very rich his commut sunday, you know or friday, even if he was poor you know, all children there was on the table that we ate, even then, there was not now, it must be, you know, my thought to make a dish, you know, i make my sense and all this, no, what's the respect, that's nice. even grievous pool, very poor, i remember my father, you know, it was a lot of people didn't have money to pay. you know what i'm saying? there were maybe 30 children, 5 children. where was the show? he went into the show, there was a special, you know, in the show, he took the children in and it took them there. our host was a small fire, some in the children. he did them, they had to, you know, take a pay, you know, maybe 10. then they got, in 2022, then they got, you know, in high, it works, you know, it's so hard, you know, it works, you know, you can spend the money, you know, but the children was coming seven o'clock, my apartment, he got that private work. he went into the show, and then after, you know, the children were coming, you know, no, you got a hard life. after my father then, then it's finished, you know, it won't make more money, even if he was very rich, no, then they make weddings, you know. they used to call him, you know, he used to serve, you know, he used to cut the cake, you know, and he used to serve like a, a kelvin, you know, in a restaurant. he used to serve, he used to make many kind of any, in everybody knows, they got cold, your salamid, he's come, he's served us, you know, this, no problem. no, this i can tell you, was very poor, no, my mother got two sisters in england, they sent us, you know, i remember, picep, passover, and she sent this office, she's sick, sick, she used to send us money from england, my mom and sister, and this is the reason why it's a vibe. let me tell you, that's the truth. can you tell me a little bit about your mother, what was her mother, dubber, dubber, my mother, she was such a woman, you know, this is the reason why i can understand here, you have one child, you know, it's so heavy out, in there my mother, you five children, she used to work everything at home, you know, and she was a sick woman. twelve o'clock a night, she got up six o'clock, twelve o'clock, she went to bed, why? and she used to like to stricken, you know, so dresses, and i remember my sister, when she got married, that they make cushions, you know, though she got goose, goose, you know, i can't play that, you know, and she made cushions from five, five, my sister. the other she was working, always, and here, you know, in no machines, no russian, russian, she used to, you know, every month, you know, she went to world war ii, this is a vassal, they call it jewish, a vassal, it's a, and she used to, you know, like they huck, they used to cook, they used to cook the, the clothes, in pots, you know, they come, and she was always, or very hard, and then she was, my father died very young, you know, he left old children and there was very young, you know, and that's how hard life she got, i remember, my grandma, i know, i remember my grandma, my grandpa, father, i remember, no, she used to sell, you know, for they make her lips bread, hyven, and gets bigger, they put, ist, ist, and she used to sell this, you know, in a lot of women, they put, you mentioned you father died when you were young, how old were you? i was 11, 12 years, i was old, my father died, you know, i went to a job, you know, like this, i was very, very rich, very horrid, i used to very, you know, i had pie over and i was very, very rich, i meant to another teacher, to do to make more, more, more i mean, you know, bigger, but when you see, you know, you know, i used to learn that the third, you know, instead, you know, so many years, 56, i never looked, you know, you know, better than it, better than it, no, when i went away, the, for a job, i went away for a job, no, kamashumma, kamashumma, i used to, we used to make the top, the top stitching, but the machine, you understand, yeah, after, after, after i don't make good, i got a monkey, he was a family, a cousin, he was a black, a tensimate, he used to make roof, roof, you know, in that point, even they built houses, they make roofs with tents, you know, in, if i developed that they make, you know, the, the others, how you call this? yeah, this, i used to make, and he used to take me, i used to make, you know, he pay me, tents, tents, lots of my mother used to live two, three weeks, a tents lot to see, give me a week, tents lot is, in i ate there, you know, we was a lot of children, you know, a lot of children that had to die, they went away, i got family in lunch, they went away there, and my mother, she got a small child, there was two years, you know, and i was meeting, meeting, meeting, meeting her, in the old sisters, they went away to lunch, you tell me about your sisters and your brother, yeah, the sisters, you see the sisters, they went away, they've been, before the lord there was in lunch, they restored by my, my mother was very happy, she didn't, the family, she got family in lunch, you know, the children they went there, you know, the lunch, you know, i was met my younger boy, younger brother, i was there, you know, give me the names of your sisters, my sisters is the outer sister was my, my, my, my, my, my, i got, like this girl, in the second was pale, and i'm the third, in the relationship was after me, rose was, this, this, this is the sister, in the brother was show, show, this, i got the three sisters, it's a mountain, pale, what was the difference in age between you, in age, in age with me, or the sisters and brother, but two years, you see i'm born in 1922, the outer sister is born in, in the 25th, in the outer sister is born in 16th, night, the 15th or the 1960, in the brother, you know, i know he's born in 1932, when my father died by 32, but maybe he was about three years old, and i went away, he was older, yeah, what language was spoken at home? oh, yiddish, but out on the street, the yiddish. in the street, yiddish, i see a pull-up sometimes, you know, you know, i spoke polish, i, i spoke polish, very good, i went to public school too, i went to a great, what kind of books and newspapers were in your home? oh, me, books, you know, i got, you know, children, i got max goldis, i got russian pushkins, cold stories, you know, old yiddish, just i, my father, my father, you know, allowed me to read these books, you understand, he told me this is not good, they yiddish, i used to took them to library and books, max goldis, i used to talk stories, i was very, since i was 10 years, 11 years, i used to read so many books, i was all translation, out on to yiddish, even god's, i couldn't tell it, dr. hugo, hugo, you know, my brother is, i used to read dr. hugo's book, the french writer, i used to read in yiddish, in john valjean, with this, it was very interesting in the reading, i was reading, even here, i used to read, you know, yiddish books, you know, i learned in a lot of english, and i read english, you know, you mentioned, you attended public school, yeah, i, public school for class, till what grade did you, for, for grade, for grade, and there were jews and non-jews, together, there was jews, not jews to get, did you experience any anti-semitism in school? oh, yeah, everyday, when i went to school there, you know, always the, the, always the, always the criticize, dj, partial, you are dirty, eat, dirty jew, very anti, in every time that's right, that was outside school, just, yeah, outside, and after, we went outside, you know, we got fights, made, made, i couldn't stand, you understand, and then, you know, this, i used to fight, and they called me, my publisher to come, from the, the top, you know, the mommy's coming, you know, the picture, sent me away from school, you know, though, you know, it's, i know it was right, they, they write, always was right, they start this, everything, you know, was not good, since the verse, and not good, did you have, i'm sorry, did you have any friends that were non-jewish? no friends, just, you know, you know, by, by my uncle, my feta, he was our tense, my t-us, or pago, you know, you know, you know, you're the same, this is, that is, and i meet them, but i was working with them, that you're still work, my uncle used to take the, and christian, you know, told for them, you know, you're still work, then i was working with them. yeah, i've made many times, no, boys, very big artists, i've done this, since i was, i was six years old, seven years old, always, even my state, you know, you know, you know, kupu yu jida, jid parcheve, don't buy by the jewish fat, the most jewish they got stores, you know, they got, they got to drink, you say, rest the transmit, snaps, not go, go in, it's going to get coming, in all of a sudden they come in, his always fights was there, in bar, they break everything, they, you know, in my state, you know, i tell you, absolute boys, you know, they got baugoolis, you know, what's about, they got horas, baugley, they got, yeah, in day by day, but they go in the, you know, she stores, that is, that there's something, in day make, pay a few boys, you know, they, he then was great, then was afraid, not like this, the jewish afraid to go in night, even my boss there, you know, to go in this section, that section, the day, nobody, like he is afraid to go in the hard in night, this time, you know, this time, like this was there, very, very, very, in, in this i can tell you, you say, by, i feel, you know, but they do, when they do to the jewish, when hitler was come always, you know, what they say, before the war, they said, i'm glad, it's coming to you, they kill you, in this, in the battle of pateau, this was in the night of the day, then a lot of germans, they run away from germany, in they was coming to poland, they made some of the class, you know, in this, go to the service, in this, there is my heart, you know, i know, they built special, why, no, i find out, why they built the class, all the people, all the all the concentration of the poland, you know, my dan coach wench and, you know, in lublin, there is my danik, you know, why, but the poland, when the hitler came in, then they killed the old jewish, a lot of them. it was a tantrum, he got a store in manufacture, so it was all working, you know, christian, they was all working, you know, after the hitler was coming, you know, they killed the, he got a board, they cut them off the board, and they took over the service. this was in the paris week, the paris week, when i was there, you know, in the beginning, they took over, they took over, this, not the gentlemen, they took over, oh, this horse, let me bring you back a little bit, was we jumping at her a little too far now, about yourself, what, what, were you interested in sports when you were young? it's sports, yeah, i used to play, you know, sake, i used to play, it's me, by, by every organization, you know, draw, batar, you know, the senior, you know, i used to play, back, front, back, you know, sake, i used to play, yeah, i was interested. so these sports events were just played with other jews, all jewish, and you mentioned different organizations, you, in any particular organization, i used to belong to the jewish, they brought, draw a building, this, so, and my sister used to belong to ilgen zwilang, batar, they used to, you know, i got all this discussion with the biden, you know, you know, you know, you know, shabakatsaya, midom, it is this out, socialism, no, no, but coming is in there, no, no, no, no, don't make cry for you, you got all this discussion, that is, that is the fact that, mid to discussions, we used to fight the ovens. what other organizations, were in zabakatsaya, do you remember any other jewish zionist organizations? yeah, there, mr. ragh, there was, i tell you, god, don't, you, god, don't, oh, oh, oh,galwood, doesn't, bunker ziggum. when the point was in the kill, he went to england. they did not believe him. he went to england. ziggum, he was a buddhist. he was in synap. i eat. no, he was a synap. no, he was a buddhist. he was the u.d. believement or even to england. you're a descent. in a tall, they kill jewish. by nobody said, they don't believe him. you know, he took a gun. ziggum in kill himself, now i believe him. this was when you, you fought the past the way before you were bombid food. were you bombid food? no. yeah, i'm a mid-strainer. after my part of the past, i'll be. you were bombid food. yeah, i got bombid food. yes, it. my father, past, i was, i tell you, i'll have 12 years, and i never got bombid food. and it, when stuff, then i remember my uncle. i got the uncle in a row. it's in takin' he took me and showed, you know, put the trailer, say, where does the other other man is? in like, i'm missing. do you remember any social events that took place in zavikos, any plays or concerts that they call? there was, yeah, there was. the organizations, the senior organizations, they make the groups, you know, they used to play all this. they used to be, you know, you're safe with the brother, 11 brothers, you know. joseph, the brothers, this thing used to play. they used to play, can you scap all jew? and show my life, it's a lot. and i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm, i'm not concerned they make, they rent and all, all jewish, they rent their rent, you know. the old organizations, they used to make, they used to play. yeah. yeah. you know, it was very good to read. boy, so, so small, so cold to read, you know. bob, was everything, everything was there. steve, you know, if, you know, if in the organization, if it's libraries, libraries are such a library, it's there. you know how many libraries there was? four in such a small city. you know, i said, you know, it was, sir, bob will take, i says, bob will take, like that. yeah. you mentioned that you had pay us. uh, yeah. did you consider that would you consider yourself a civic? yeah, i was, i was very, uh, not, not considered like this. no, i was, uh, or a dog's very little dogs. no, no, no fly, she kind of never, never in my life. never with the darwin. darwin is stable. i remember my side was alive. it took me a, the stable. you know, what's stable, small, but they belong to the rabbi. i see them, my, my side used to belong to rabbi minashabh. he was working for rabbi minashabh. he was, you know, i say agabh. either i'm saying anything, or she's not agabh. but you see, the most religious woman, if they know have children, they go to the rabbi, the rabbi, vince, that they went to the rabbi. in my grandfather used to write, used to write, oh, you can go in this time, in this time, in this time to the rabbi. this is agabh in the rabbi. you mentioned the rabbi name minashabh. yeah, rabbi minashabh, where was he from? he wrote a writer, a writer in polish is a jesuit. the writer was a in he got, he got a son. he got a son. he was a rabbi. a rabbi, a roof in my side is a very small, or rich. he's a, from the nationalist or the or the or the rich. now he does in, was a mindset, the very first. he was a rich, or the brother, the rabbi, the rabbi, this was brothers. he was in the in the austro of the, the, in the, the most in, the most in, the most in jesuits. you know, in this was exceeded. the messiah took me always in them, steve, stephen, this is as i showed for the, see them. the other, my group of each other is a trusted of a church in, in there, he used to be like, everybody got, you know, this, this was, see them. now i, we was very, or even i got the system, my sister, you know, so respect, there was alternate, i, so respect my father, i remember after children, he was laying down. he was so many children, who, quite, i've had this slip, but yeah, this thing. i missed the back club, we're going to stop now, to change the tape, but for the past, that's all. okay. thanks. do you enjoy this one? you you