mr. beckler, we were talking about religious observance. do you remember celebrating the high holidays? oh yeah. i remember. i should have tell you. please. it was coming early in the day. my father, but 12 years before the event, always insured. early in the day, he got a kittle, you know, it's a kittle, you know, and i remember he took me there to breast children. i admit it, you know, and they pray, you know. this was the high holidays. when we was young, i remember we drink water, drink with kids, you know, three, five years old. nobody, no, this, they never give us drink water. this is very early in kippe. in kippe, who wants, you know. i passed, i passed. i remember my mother give me, you know, in the shul, i went with the father in shul, and she give me a piece of khalim, a flig, you know, chicken there. no, i tell you, i haven't eaten. later. but 12 o'clock, he give me, you know. i eat, it's not like this, when i got bigger, you understand. i was fast, always. even now, i'm not so religious, you know. young kippe, you see, even i don't eat. it's not religious, no, i fast. now the rabbi, rabbi menashe, he would come in for the high holidays. he come for the most high holidays. it's not the holidays, you know, but the rabbi, a lot see them, they go to jesuit, russian. now the most, he come high holidays. so it's them shtival. in this shtival, what they have is small, you know. it's small. they went over in shul, the island. the island see them in shul. the shul can go a few hundred people in shul. many times he was coming there. you mentioned the hasidim went to visit the rabbi. do you remember any occasions where your father or perhaps grandfather traveled to the rabbi for advice? my grandfather, my grandfather was there, always. my grandfather was with the rabbi together in reishi. he was in zavikos. since he gave him this, he was always. now i remember when he was 72 years old, he's come home to stay with the daughter, with the grandchildren. he told me, i came home shtadl. you know. so then he was coming home. before, when he was younger, he used to got, you know, to make paint, paint, paint stones. this is such a fabric, but he burn stones. he got stones, he burn fire in the stones to make the white paint. he used to got this. he used to got woods, you know, rent. they used to burn the, and after the son took over. he used to die. he died in 72. your son died in... no, my grandfather died. no, the son was together with my son, you know. this thing make, after he used to real estate, he used to my son, you know. when he went to the rabbi, he give always the son. the son got four son, and the son, they was working the fabric in the stone. and they used to go from my city, zavikos, ozarev, chemely, skarzysko, ultimate faith, and give the stuff there, you know. this thing got a living. this is my momma's brother. this make a living. he used to live in a nice house, you know. what happened, you know what happened to the rabbi? the rabbi, okay, got killed. he was alive. when i went away, he was alive, he died. they killed him. no, horeb, he was a rabbi. he died before. he died before. he died before. he went away. like everybody, they killed him. in my city was the son, moshe. we went when the war start. all jewish, they went to market, you know, and they taught me the rabbi. a lot, they won't go away. the rabbi told me, no, don't go, don't the rabbi, you know. it's not like even it's coming, you know, nobody believe, and nobody believe, and this is the reason. if my state, nobody went away. well, how aware were you of events that were taking place in germany before the war? before the war? before the war. did you know what was going on in germany? i know, of course. i know why i know. a lot, they come up from german in 1938. they told, they went to poland, they went all over, you know, but they run away. they know, they told me it's very bad, hitler is no good. this is the reason why we run away. german is jewish, you understand. this is the reason there was kristallnacht, they told us, you understand. you remember? i felt when you read about that? yeah. no, i know, i couldn't find out. even i was in russian, why i was coming home? then i know, i know, me, nobody, my family, i stay in russia. you know why? well, i couldn't, no, i couldn't believe, you know, they all got killed, and i was coming home, you know. everybody, they told me. they took away from the arsons, they took away the jewish, they killed them not far, eight kilometer, because of isis. this you found out when? this i found out when i was coming, 1946. this is the reason i was coming from russia to see the family. i couldn't believe, i mean, maybe i find somebody, a sister, at this, and i couldn't find out. let's go back a little bit, because i'm going to ask you about that, your after-war experiences. but do you remember what you did and how you felt on september 1st, 1939, when the war broke out? yeah, oh yes. my mother told me, shmiel, you see, it's like this, i should go away. and the only children, they was in lodz, you know, when the war started, they was coming back from lodz to the mother. we was all together, you know. and after, my mother told me, shmiel, the guy, they away, you go away, you know. i tell you, no, where i can leave you, no, no, no. after, my friends come, shmiel, you go away, you see what they took. they take the most to work. where they say that you should go? you should go away from the, some, some else, you know. we don't know, we don't know, you know, they make, have russian this, we don't know. we just run away when it was very bad. and i was there two weeks, i think, three weeks, i remember, it took us to work. when did the nazis first come into zavokost? in september, first september, the second september. they were there on september 1st? yeah, i was the second, the third, but two, three weeks after they took all women in this to work, we work, you know, the streets, you know, the streets, everything. clean. and this is the reason we run away. this was in the night, i remember, but two, two weeks, three weeks. you ran away two weeks after? yeah, after this. tell me about the first two weeks. how did life change? oh, the life change. the two weeks when i run away on the road, i saw on the road a lot run away, you understand, in the germans with the 36 planes, you know, the shot of the people, you know, with, with polemoids, you know, the, a lot to kill, horses, the wagon, wagons, you know, very bad. very bad. all the road, all the road you should see where they killed them, oh, oh. in the plane, in the shot, in, i went away, i went to skarżyśko, not skarżyśko, krasnjik, lubelsk, all stayed out there. janow, lubelsk, you know, in there we run, janow, lubelsk, over. but the rabbi, there was, we was, come friday night, i remember they used to give us hallow with fish, and we, we run away. and a lot, a lot is sitting, if in janow, lubelsk, you know, but we don't know where, where it went, you know. so you don't know where, you just ran. just ran. what did you take with you? nothing. just like those, i got nothing with nothing. who did you run away with? i got a, eh? who did you run away with? me friends. how many? three friends. three friends i got. no, there was on the road a lot. we meet, we, all together, you understand? you see. i don't know the other node. three friends i got good friends when i was in school in, in haider, you know. when i have the picture taken, and we run away, one got killed. the rest of, the rest of your family, your, your younger brother and your sister stayed home? they left home. they stayed home. they stayed home. my mother, you forced me, you know, go, go, go, go, go. in iran, and after, let me tell you, i won't go back. i was crying. i was 17 years old. i was crying and i won't go back. i told myself i lived, my mother was sick, you know, she very nervous, everything, you know. and i won't go back. i couldn't go back. there was fire all over, you understand. you know, we went, we went till with the, i remember after, oh, we was yanov rebels, yanov, yeah. and after crashing, crashing, i got family, they give me a few dollars, i should go away. and they went to other places. and then i went to the pan-ukrainian, but i see no planes, no nothing, quiet, and i don't know what this is. how did you get there? i walk. we walk in a lot, got horses, buggers, horses, no cars. they took us. how long did it take? oh, took me two weeks, three weeks. but three weeks it took four weeks. three weeks was coming. and now i see quiet after i find out the russian there. it's a lot, a lot they got the uniform, you know, the uniform in polish, yeah, in the russian kingdom. polish, polish, polish military, when the russian, when they run away too, the polish, you understand. i don't know if it's all jewish, it's not jewish. they wasn't the polish army, no, they run away too, you understand. and the russian came, the army, but they went there, this close, polish close, you know, with this. after a lot, they went to the jewish, they give them a jacket, they change, they change this. and i was in japan ukraine in rovno. in the russian, in rovno? in rovno. in this russian occupied area, did you have to protect, did you hide your jewish identity? no, no, no. no, no, that was also jewish, that was jewish. you know, i went three brothers, they was, you know, i'm telling you, bierznyk run away from who? he took me inside. gus, michael gus, i never forget, all brothers. and they told me, maybe you work for me. he used to sell, you know, wheat, for bread, you know, flour, everything, you know, the ice, work fine. and after, every bierznyk, they call bierznyk, you know, they must register, no, you must. i register to go home. who wants go home? they can go home. no, i register, i will go home. you know, when i register to go home, they send me to siberia. why were you picked to go to siberia? they pick, the russians. what were the circumstances that they picked you? not me, everybody who registered, but i won't go home. i won't go home to my mother, you know, i know, i love mother, you know. i mean, i couldn't go, i couldn't go, why i register to go home? they said that's the siberia, in according to mind. we are in siberia. novosibirsk. novosibirsk, in the coal mine, you know, this i could, i wish my, i wish my death, you know, my death. we used to work there 18 hours in the coal mine, no food. they got 600 gram bread a day, is this, the bread was like a stone, you know. a little bit, we used to work with a little tea, tea water, a little water, with a salt table. in this you work 14, 15 hours in the coal mine, you know. and every day in the coal mine, you know, when they take the coal, they put holes and they put dynamite. falls down in the coal, you know, a lot of, every day eight people, 10 people got killed in the coal mine. and i was 18 months in the coal mine, you know. i tell you, no, hungary, hungary in this, i tell you, you know, i must go in the army, kill a few germans, you know, in the kumin, i mean, like this. it took me, you know, long, 18 months, you know. this was every day? every day, every day, and i used to work, you know, in hungary. i remember i went to the doctor, you know, i couldn't walk to the work, you know. i couldn't walk and i couldn't work, you know. they hit me, this, i should, but i couldn't, no, till half an hour took, you know. i got this and they, i used to, i was a lesser the subject, you know, was lesser the subject. i used to carry big beans. then they take the coal, you know, they hold it there, you know. no, there was gas, there was, i think, my life is all dead together, you understand. it's better to go in the army, you know. i wrote, as i have learning, as i have learning, i want to go in the army. well, how did you have the opportunity to enlist in the russian army? but you're 58 and a half hours and they told us, who wants to go to the army, can go to the army. i wrote, as i have learning, you know, took three months, they said i should go to bursk in the punk. when they learned after, automatic, the rifle, you know, and i went there in 1942. i remember they sent me in state, state state of graz, i was in stalingrad, in bursk. i learned, and after we learned, i was engineer, engineer pantone bridge, you know. we used to build, we used to build on the wall, the water, the bridges, you know. pantones. pantones, you know. we built, the katyusha went, the tanks went, and after we take apart, we built another. what was the name, do you remember the name of the unit that you were in? 65, 65 pantone, pantone engineer. yeah, 65 punk. this i remember. and the work you were doing were to build the pantones? in there, in there was old thing, you know. there i, i, i, i not care for my dad. foot i got, what got, every day, spirit they give. you know what spirit? this was, we went, you know, in, in, and after this, we built the bridge in the night, you know. we cut woods, the woods for the, for the bridge. it was working day and night. now there was foot, this, i don't care for the dead. you know, a lot got killed, then they built. you should have seen the planes, the german planes, you know. so where was this, which battles were? stalingrad. stalingrad? stalingrad is, this wasn't stalingrad. yeah. oh, yeah. and when you were in the russian army, did they, the people you worked with, did they know of your jewish identity? i'm jewish, yeah, they know. i told them, i never there, then i was afraid. did you experience any anti-semitism? yeah. in the russian army? you see, when i was, there was, yeah, in the kolmai, ukrainia, not russian, ukrainia, but they was in russia. they was big anti-semitism. they, he killed so many there in the kolmai. in kolmai, you don't know if they killed, they mean he killed cherubov, his name. he told me many times, i was a good worker. he told me, you, you know, this is not your jewish spinet, you're jewish. or from somebody who works, you eat, you know. this is a cherubov. other ukrainia, you eat. oh, yeah. there was, no, you see, but stalin, eh? maybe he was a communist. no, there was, the russian people alone was good people. a lot of times, how much they give me potatoes, you know. i used to do a job for them, you know, cutting hay for this. by russian, every family, they got a cow, chicken, see understand. this was, no, there was a long poo, you know. there was good, russian people was good. no, the government alone, you know. even there was election, i remember, you know. i couldn't vote, i never had to stand. this was russian. while you were there, did you maintain your observance of judaism? no, they're nervous. when i was there, i was looking all over there, all clothes. all synagogues, big synagogues, there was all clothes. oh, there is nothing, no, nothing. even i find, i remember, there was, after the war, yeah, after the war, i find such a religious people, you know. we got sinners, you know, with peace. this after the war, i went, then i find. they got stevelach, you know. how you say, nobody know. they daven, they, you understand. what kind, this was in, in, in, in, in other, this. but they was religious jewish. a lot they got mala, you know, they got everything, you know. this was for the government. they was afraid for the government. they got... so while you were in the russian army, you encountered jews in russia? you encountered, you met jews living in russia? yeah, yeah. i got a plukovnik, a general. he was a jew. he was, yeah, you know. he was so good, you know, he told me, you know, this is... he gave me a lot of bread of this, yeah. a lot plukovnik was in the russian army. but i was a minor platoon, you know. was the corner, the corner, master, you know. he was a general, a lot, very big. he was good to me. every time he invites me, you know. did you, while you were in russia, did you know what was going on in poland? no, no. and what about news of the war? was there any news that you received? i never know this. this never, you see, no papers, no radio. we never, we never believed. and i know, i told you, when i know it's like this, i will never come home. i will stay in russia. you know why? i used to go with a jewish guarantee inspector there after the war, you know. i used to love, the father was, i say, oh, it's something nice, nice family. they got two sons in the army, you know. every friday they invite me, you know. she make colors, she make this. i was closed. and after i was coming, was coming, who wants go to poland back? but general sikorski, the polish minister, they told who wants, who was born in poland, they can back poland. this is the reason i went back to poland. why? i couldn't believe, you know, my family got killed. did you go in with the russian army into poland toward the end of the war? no, not with the russian army. i went with the shalom. well, when did your military service end? in 1946. the ending in 1945. i was in the hospital. i, yeah, i, you know, i'm wounded twice. how did you get wounded? with the shrapnel. we went and shot. where? when? in the back. this was in 1942, 1943. yeah. what part of russia? this was in stalingrad, by the bridges, but you build the bridges, you know, they shot and i got wounded. this was 1943 or 1944. i was in the hospital in stalingrad, the end of the war. till the end of the war. yeah. after, when i, when they released me, no more war. did you, were you given a medal because you were wounded? i got, you know, passport to go in restaurants. not to restaurants, to eat there, you know, to eat there, lunch. this i got till i went home. so when you went home, you were already out of uniform. you turned into a civilian. of course, civilian, yeah. this i went home. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe you, no, i can't find nobody. you see, this is very... so you returned directly to zavikost? yeah, directly to zavikost. and when i was coming up, the people stayed to zavikost. no jewish, no, no, nobody. for luck, they told me that i asked for my teachers, you know, public school. i remember, you know, sobecky, you know, they told me he's alive and they told me where he lives. he was living on another side and i went to him. i went to him, he told me such a nice... you see, there is a lot of politics. he was so good. give me a eating, give me money, he told me schmulek, goes down to... there is pogrom. there was... when i was there in 1946, there was the pogrom in keretz. they killed 150 people. that was the time you were in zavikost? this is the time i was in zavikost. was there any actions against jews in zavikost at that time? i couldn't stay. i was a day there, i was... but he not let me go. but there was such a... when they see a jew, you understand, they kill them. so it was very dangerous for you to be there. very dangerous. this is the reason he gave me money, he told me to go away. where i went, i went austria. before we get there, let me ask you, how did you discover what happened to your family? who told you? somebody told me that, you know. and they described what happened in 1943. yeah, 1943. somebody told me that in zavikost, you know, the teacher, sobecky, and others, you know. what did they tell you? they took out the jewish and they killed them in zavikost, in finstätter. they killed them in dvikozi, 8 kilometer, you know. did they say who participated? they say a lot. polaks, the most polaks. polaks helped? oh, of course. did they say, polaks helped the nazis? polaks helped the nazis. in the executions? yeah. the most polaks. this is the reason why i can't stand that. there was a picture. they have jewish a lot. there was a picture with him. he saved a lot of jewish. you know why he saved jewish? he couldn't make no more money. there was a shindler's list. shindler's list, you understand? like this. no. he saved. but he saved. but they give him gold and this and everything, you understand? but he couldn't, was entered the war soon, you understand? he took them to work. no, he saved like a thousand for this. no, like this. he was the same nazi like everybody. we're going to stop here to change the tapes right now. no, no, no, no, no. no, no, no, no, no.