mr. beckler, we're talking about religious observance. do you remember celebrating the high holidays? oh yeah, sure. airview and kippa, you know, i remember. yeah. i should have tell you, please. i was coming to airview and kippa, you know. my father, but three of the sleepers before the hour, you know, he went all over the school. now, airview and kippa, you know, he went and got a kid, you know, i was a kid, you know, this event there. and i remember he took me out there to another. rest children, you know, i went with them, you know, in the pray, you know. this was the high of this. in where we was young, i remember we, a drink water, a drink of kids, you know, three, five years old, nobody, this, and they never give us a drink water. this is basically the airview and kippa. you know, who wants, you know, i passed, i passed, i remember. my mother gave me a, you know, in the show, i met the father-in-shoe. and she gave me a piece of holland, a flea, you know, chicken, there, no, i tell you, that, i didn't, later, but film a clock, you know, it's, you know, like this, when i got bigger, you're the central. yeah, i was fast and obvious. even now, i'm not sorry, i'll let you know. you know, kippa, you see, even, i know, it's not religious, no, i passed. now, the rabbi, by manasha, you would come in through a high holidays. he come up, the most high holidays. it's not the whole holidays, you know, but the rabbi, i love to see them, they go to joshua, raishin. now, the most common high holidays is in the stream. in the stream, i'll let they have a small, you know, it's small. they went all in the show, the other, the other city, in the show, the shulis can go up a few hundred people in the show. they went, yeah, he was, many times he was coming there. he mentioned that haseedam went to visit the rabbi. do you remember any occasions where your father, or perhaps grandfather traveled to the rabbi for advice? my grandfather, my grandfather was there, always. my grandfather was met the rabbi together in raishin. he was in zavichos, the sense he gave him this, i got him with him, you know, though he was always, you know, i remember when he was 72 years old, he's coming home to stay with the daughter, with the grandchildren, and it is, you know, to go up to god, i can stand, you know, there. then he was coming home. now, before when he was younger, he used to got, you know, he used to make paint, paint, pinstones. this is such a fabric for a burning stones. he got stones, a bottle of fire in the stones. they make the white paint. he used to get these. he used to get boots, you know, he rent. they used to burn the, enough that the sun took over. he used to buy, and he died, talking in the sun. the sun died. no, my grandfather died. no, the sun was together, met my son, you know, this thing. he used to stay with my son, you know. he went to the rabbi, he gave us all the stuff. the sun cut for some. the sun was working in the fabric, and they used to go from my city, zabihos, ojorov, chmele, skarjiska, ultimate failure to begin and give them the stuff that they, you know, this is my mom's brother. this is my colleague. he used to live in a nice house. what happened, you know, what happens at a rabbi? okay, he was alive. when i went away, he was alive, he died. they killed him. no, horbe. a rabbi was a rabbi, but he died. he died before, he died before, a rabbi, a rabbi, a man, a son, a man, like everybody killed him. in my city, it was the sun. the sun, moshehun, we went to the war start. all jewish, they went to the market, you know, in the traveling of the rabbi. a lot they won't go away. the rabbi told me, no, don't go, don't the rabbi, you know, it's not that even it's coming, you know, nobody believe, you know, but they believe it. this is the reason, if you might stay on the number of events. well, how aware were you of events that were taking place in germany before the war? that's what the war was. do you know what was going on in germany? i know, of course. i know, by, i know, by a lot they come up from january 9th, the 28th. they told, they went to poland, they went all over, you know, but they run away. they know, they're turning, it's very bad. it's not good, this is the reason, we run away. jim was jewish, you understand? this is, there was, there was christenite, they told us, you understand? you remember? if we don't have the time to remember. yeah, no, i know, i couldn't, i couldn't find out. even i was in russian, by i was coming home. then i know, i know, meet nobody, my family, i stay in russian, you know why? well, i couldn't, no, i couldn't believe, you know, the old god came up, the neighbors come home, you know, everybody, they told me. they took away, from the outset, they took away the jewish, they killed them not far, eight kilometers. because i see, they found out when. this, i thought, i've never come in night before the six. this is the reason i was coming from russian to see the family. i couldn't believe, i mean, maybe i find someone that says that this, you know, i couldn't find something. let's go back a little bit, i'm going to ask you about that. yeah, you're after war experiences. but do you remember what you did and how you felt on september 1, 1939, when the war broke out? yeah, oh, yeah. my mother turned in, she made, you see? it's like this, i should go away. in the only children, they was in lunch. you know, when the four start, they was coming back from lunch to the mother. we was all together, you know. and after my mother told me, she made, you go away, you know, i tell you, no, where i can live you, no, no, no, after my friends coming, she made, you go away, you see what they took. they take the most to work, where they say that you should go. you should go away from the summer, you know. we don't know, we don't know, you know. they make a have russian this, we don't know. we just run away when it was very bad. and in i was there two weeks, i think, three weeks, i remember it took us to work. the nazis first commenced as other costs. in september, september, the second september, there was a move. yeah, i was the second, the third, but two, three weeks, after they took all women in this work, we work, you know. this, this streets, you know, the streets, everything, everything, clean, in this, there is a way, run away. this was the night, i remember, back two weeks, three weeks. the way two weeks, after this, huh? tell me about the first two weeks, how did life change? oh, the life change, the two weeks when i run away, one day, i saw under a lot, run away, you understand? in the germans, with 36 planes, you know, the shot of the people, you know, the polynials, you know, there are a lot of kilo horses, the wagner wagons, you know, in very, very bad. very bad, all the roads, all the roads, you should see that they killed them, oh, they didn't, they played in the shot. in the, in the, i went away, i went to skarsheesk, not skarsheesk, krasheek, lebelsk, all the state out there, young lebelsk, you know, in there, we run, we ran in lebelsk, but the rabbi, there was, we was coming friday night, i remember they used to give us a lot of things, calling it fish, you know, they run away. now a lot, a lot is sitting in the end of the buildings, you know, but we don't know where everyone is, you know, where you just ran, just ran, what did you take with you? nothing, just like us, got nothing with nothing. i got that with, hey, who you run away with? me friends, a lot of me. three friends, three friends, i got, no, that was on the road, a lot, we meet, we, we, we all together, you know what i said? you see, i don't know the other, no, three friends, i got good friends when i was in school, you know, i had, you know, when i had the picture tuck in there, you'd be run away, on that kill. the rest of your family, your younger brother, and your sister's there. stay left, they stay, they stay. my mother, you first me, you know, gosh, me, go, go, go. you know, you run, enough to, let me tell you, i went go back, i was crying, i was 70 years old, i was crying, and i went go back. i told myself, i live, my mother was sick, you know, she, very nervous, everything, you know. you know, and i went go back, i couldn't go back. was far, you know, very odd, you know, we went, we went till with, for power, i remember after, oh, we was, the end of the race, yeah, and after crashing, crashing, i got family, they gave me a few dollars, i should go away. and they went to other places. and then i went to zapadne, cryin'in', but i see, it's no place, no nothing quite, and i don't know what's disease. how did you get there? i woke, we woke, and i got the horses, bug the horses, no cars, they took us, how long did it take? oh, took me a two weeks, three weeks, but three weeks took four weeks, could it be what's coming? i see quite after, if i'm not, the russian, there. a lot, i got the uniform, you know, the uniform in polish, in the russian-kim, polish, polish, okay, polish will tell you, when they run away too, the polish, you know what i mean? i don't know if it's, or the jewish, there wasn't a polish army, no, they run away too. the russian-kim, the other, but they went there, the polish, polish, polish, you know, this, after a lap, they went to the jewish, they gave them a jacket, they changed, they changed, they spent the effort this. and i was in, there, japan, korea, in the russian, in the russian, in the russian, in the russian, in the russian. in this russian-occupied area, did you have to, do you have to protect, did you hide your jewish identity? no, no, no, that was the jewish. that was jewish, that was jewish, you know, i went pretty bad at the stables, you know, i'm telling a japanese, i run away from who he took me inside. gu's, meh, gu's, i never forget all brothers, he told me, maybe you will come here, he used to sell, you know, with, and for bread, you know, flower, everything, you know, the highest lord find, enough there, every business, they can't be a jewish, you know, they must register, no, you must, the high register to go home, who wants to go home, they can go home. no, i register to have a go home, you know, when i register to go home, they'll send me to siberia. why did, would you pick the gautesei barrier? they picked the russian, i mean, what were the circumstances that they picked you? not me, they picked everybody who was, but i went go home, i went go home to my mother, you know, i know i, i went mother, you know, i couldn't go home, i couldn't go home, but i register to go home, that said that's the siberia, in our core of the mind. we are in siberia, no, but it's a bit, no, it's a bit, in the coil of mind, you know, this, i wish my death, you know, my death, we used to work there, eight hours in the coil of mind, no food. they got 600 grand bread a day, is this, the bread was like a stone, you know. go on, a little bit, you used to work with our little shi, shi, you know, i was a little bit, a little bit, i saw a pickle, in this you work, four to the fifth, in the coil of mind, you know. in every day in the coil of mind, you know, when they take the coil, they put holes in, they put dynamite, holes down in the coil, you know. i love that every day, eight people, 10 people got killed in the coil of mind. i was there 18 months in the coil of mind, you know. no, i'm getting this, i tell you, i must go and die and kill after you, you know, in the coming and like this. it took me, you know, long, eight months, you know. this was every day, every day, every day, you know, you know, you know, you know, i remember i went to that doctor, you know, i couldn't work to the work, you know. i couldn't work, you know, they hit me this, i shouldn't. but i couldn't, you know, till i have a now took, you know. i got this in the eye, i used to, i was a lesser than star trek, you know, was lesser than star trek. i used to carry big beans, then they take the coil, you know. they hoped and tell, you know, no, there was gas, there was the, i think in mind, my life is all dead together. you know, you know, you know, i wrote as i have a lanyan, the such as i have lanyan, i won't go in their entirety. what did you have the opportunity to enlist in the russian army? but you're 15, 8,000, they told us who once got to the army can go to the army. i wrote as i have lanyan, you know, took three months. i said, i should go to bursk in the punk. when they learned after atamat, the rifle, you know, in ivente, in 1942, i remember they said, in state, state, state, i was in stalingrad, i wasn't studying raffin bursk. i learned, enough to be learned, i was the engineer, engineer, pantone brition, you know, we used to build, we used to build on the vulgar, what the britches, you know, pantone. pantone, pantone, pantone, you know, if you build the kachushavent, the tanks went, you know, after we take apart, if we built the lanyan. what was the name? do you remember the name of the unit that you were in? six to five, six to five pantone pantone engineer. six to five, this i remember. and the work you were doing was built on the tanks. instead, it was working, i'm not careful, i'm not dead. food, i got, what got, everybody used to be, spilt, you know what, spilt? this was really meant, you know, enough to this, that we built the britches in the night, you know, we cut boots. the boots for the britches, the britches, they unite. no, there was food in this. they're not in the kafat, they're dead. a lot of them cut, they built. you should see the planes, the general planes, you know. so where was this, which battles? stalingrad. stalingrad? stalingrad, this was in southern. yeah. oh. yeah. and when you were in the russian army, the people you worked with, they know of your jewish country. i'm jewish. yeah. i told you, i never, then i was afraid to do experience any anti-semitism in the russian army. you see, when i was there was, yeah, in the corner of my, ukran, not russian, ukran, but there was, you know, there was big anti-semitism. they, he killed so many of the in the corner of my, i ain't calling my youth now, if you're killed. i mean, he killed, chair of his name. he told me many times now, i was a good worker. he told me, you're jewish, partially, you know, this is, naturally jewish, been a to jewish, of from, somebody works, you eat, you know, this is a chair of, other, other, you, you, you eat, you, you, oh, yeah, there was no, you see, but stalin, maybe he was a communist, no, there was, the russian people alone was good people. a lot of times, i'm much, they give me a potatoes, you know, i used to do a job for them, you know, and a cotton hay for this, but russian, every family, they got, they, a cow, chickens, you understand, and this was, now there was a, i won't push, you know, there was good, russian people was good, now the government alone, you know, even there was a election, i remember, you know, i couldn't work, i remember this time, this was a rush, while you were there, did you, um, maintain your observance? do you know, dead in the verse? then i was dead, i was looking all over there, all close, all synagogues, big synagogues, all close, all close, all, there is nothing, no, even i find, i remember, there was, after the word, yeah, after the word, i find, i find such a religious people, you know, because, see this, you know, with this, after the word, i went, then i find, they got steeblac, you know, i say, nobody knows, they doubt, they, you know, what, this was, in, as i understand, i think, this, but there was a religious, jewish, allah, they got, everything, you know, this was, for the government, there was a place for the government, that they got, so while you were in the russian army, you encountered jews in russia, you encountered, you met jews living in russia. yeah, i got a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, you know, he served, was served good, you know, he told me, this is, he gave me a lot of bread of this, yeah, a lot of communicates was in russia, that i was in my inner platoon, you know, was the governor, the governor, my state, you know, it was a general, what, any big, was good to me, every time you fight three, no. did you, while you were in russia, did you know what was going on in poland? no. what about news of the war? was there any news that you were saying? i never know. this, never, you see, no papers, no, we never, we never believed. and i know, i tell you, when i know, it's like this, i've never come out, i've been saying this. you know, why? i used to go into a jewish spirit, they're specter there after the war, you know, in my, i used to love, the father was, i was saying, all of it's something nice, nice family. they got two sons in the army, you know, every friday they invite me, you know, you see big colors, you make this. i was close, you know, enough to have us coming, and i was coming, who once got to poland back by the nara-shikorisk, the polish, you see, they talk, who was born in the poland, they came back to poland. this is the reason i went back to poland. why? but i couldn't believe, you know, my family got killed. did you go in with the russian army into poland or the end of the war? no, no, not metarasha army. i went to the shallow. or when did your military soon? in the foreign states, the ending of the night of 45. i was in the hospital. yeah, i, you know, i'm, i'm one that, twice, i'll give, metarasha, metarasha, metarasha, metarasha, where, when? in the back, this was in night of 42, night of 43. yeah, night of war of russia, where was this? this was in stalingrad, but the bridges, but the, where you built the bridges, you know, the shut and i got one that, this was in night of 43 or 44. five was in hospital. in stalingrad, the end of the war. so the end of the war. yeah. after then, then i, then the release me, no, no more war. you know, did you, were you given a medal because you wounded? i got, you know, i was passport to go in restaurants, not, i had the restaurants to eat there. you know, to eat lunch. this i got, till i went home. so when you went home, you were already out of uniform. you were already out of civilian. of course. it's a real, yeah. it's a real, yeah. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe you. i couldn't believe you. no, i can find nobody. you see this, that is, yeah. correct you to zavino's. even when i was coming up, the people stayed to zavino's. no, no, nobody. for luck. the, they told me, they asked me for my teachers, you know, probably school, i remember, you know, zavino, you know, they told me, he's alive in the tournament, very lives. he was living another side. he and i went to him. he went to him. he told me, it's such a nice, you see? there is a lot of poleks. now he was so good. give me a, give me a money, tell me schmullic. go stunt. there is pogroma. there was, when i was in there, in 1946, there was the pogromic edits. they killed 100 to 50 people. this is the time you were in the first place. this is the time i was in zavino's. was there any, for the six? actions against jews in zavichost at that time. i couldn't stay. i was a day there. i was born. but he not let me go. but there was such a, but they see a jew. you understand? they killed it. so it was very dangerous for you. very dangerous. this is the reason you get me money, tell me, go away. where i went, i went, austria. but before we get there, let me ask you, how, how did you discover what happened to your family? who told you? somebody told me that. you know, somebody described what happened in 1943. yeah, 1943, somebody told me that in zavichost, you know, the teacher sub-ets, in others, you know, what did they tell you? they took out the jewish, they killed them. in zavichost, in stata, they killed them, and because it, it killed them at the, you know, do they say, who participated? they say, they say, they say, a lot, polis. the most polis. still. paul less. helped, helped and that's it. paul less is the, in the executions, yeah, the most products. this is, that is why i can't stand, like, that was a picture, that has jewish, that was a picture with him, he, he saved a lot of jewish here. you know why he said, jewish? make no more money that is shins, shins, shins, shins, shins, shins. you understand? like this, you know, you say, pais saved, but they give gold and this and everything you understand? by he couldn't present the divorce. so you understand? he took them to work. you know, no, he saved takah, tarzan, for this. but they're not trying in this. stop here to change the tapes right now.