... my name is manuel bikir. today is november 7, 1996. i am conducting an interview with samuel beckler. the interview is being conducted in flushing, new york.... his name is manuel bicher. today is november 7th, 1996. i'm conducting an interview with samuel beckler. we're in flushing, new york, and we'll be conducting the interview in english. please give me your name and spelling. my name is samuel bicher, s-a-m-u-e-l, bicher-b-e-k-l-d-r. and what is your name at birth? schmied schmold. schmold bicher. and when were you born? i'm born in 28th of march, the 3rd. march, 3rd, 9th, 22. and how old are you? i'm 74 years. and what was the city you were born in? schmied was zavichost. zavichost, this is paviat sandomiesz in poland. that's the name of the region. in würzköl, there was würzkäletsk. würzkäletsk. paviat was like new york queens. queens, new york. and this was zavichost sandomiesz, not würzkäle. it's kälets. kälets, käletsk. how far away was zavichost from käletsk? 20 kilometers. yeah, 20 kilometers. there was other cities too, you know. austro-viets. it's about 18 kilometers. austro-viets, you know, all cities. this was a small city. we got relatives in austria. how large was zavichost? zavichost was a small city. it was 300 families. 4,000 jewish people. they lived in a particular area of zavichost. yeah, jewish. they used to live in the jewish altogether. there is schrodin, synagogues, libraries in jewish, you know. and the most jewish altogether. in the products, they live in a different area. can you please describe the house that you lived in? the house, i was got two rooms, you know. there was a synagogue. the shur was there, and i was laid in the shur. the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the in yiddish they say, milamit, this is in hebrew. he used to teach children hebrew, you know, till himish russia. himish russia, this is the else after, you know, they go to another, the children, they go to another, bigger, the mooring, twist of his, you know, ramban, you know, he was in four years, five years, till himish russia, till the ten, eleven years, eleven children, fifteen, eleven, and after they went to the big house. he was a hebrew teacher. and yiddish is a milamit, he didn't smell children. was he religious? very rich, very rich. i mean, old children. he was five children, you know. all was very religious. it's commissality, you know, friday evening was poor, you know. old children, they were on the table, and we ate, even then there was nothing to eat. now old, must be, you know, my taught to make kiddish, you know, i make my sin, and all this, and all that respect, that's nice. even we were poor, very poor, i remember. my father, you know, he was a milamit, a lot of people didn't have money to pay. you know what i'm saying? he learned maybe thirty children, maybe thirty five children. where was the shul? he went into shul, there was a special, you know, in the shul, he took the children, and it hit them there. our horse was small for so many children, yes. he hit them, you know. and he got paid, you know, maybe ten, ten got paid. in twenty, twenty-two, then i got your kannabic. in high he works, you know, he's so hard, you know. he works for the money, you know. but the children was coming seven o'clock, my father, he got a private look. he went to the shul, and after, you know, the children they were coming, you know, got a hard life. after my father, when it's finished, you know, it won't make more money, even, it was a very old dog. no, and then they make weddings, you know. they used to call him, you know, he used to serve, you know, he used to cut the cake, you know, and he used to serve like a, a kelner, you know, in a restaurant. he used to make, many kind of money. and everybody knows, they like, oh, he has a lot of money, he's come, he's served us. this, this, this, i can tell you, was very poor, you know, my mother got two sisters in england. they sent us, you know, i remember paisa, paisa, in, she sent this office, sickest, sickest, she used to send us money from england, my, my, my, my sister. in this there is, it's a vibe. i think, that's, that's it, right. could you tell me a little bit about your mother or what was her? my mother, dobe, my mother, she was such a woman, you know, this is the reason that i can understand theory, you have one child, you know, he's so heavy out. in there, my mother, you, five children, she used to work everything at home, you know, and, she was a sick woman. twelve o'clock at night, she got up, six o'clock, twelve o'clock she went tonight to bed. why? she used to like, like, to stricken, you know, so, dresses. and i remember my sister, when she got married, they make cushions, you know, so she got goose, goose, you know, i killed the pederate, how you, you know, and she made cushions for, for my sister. the other she was working, always. and here, you know, in no machines, you know, washing, washing, she used to, you know, every month, you know, she went to water. this is a vassal. they call it jewish vassal. it's, she used to, you know, like they huck in the used to cook. they used to cook the clothes in pots, you know, they come. she was always old, very hard. and then she was, my father died very young, you know, he left all children and there was very young, you know, and it was a hard life she got. i remember my grandma's, i know i remember my grandma, my grandfather, i remember, no, she used to sell, you know, you know, for they make hollis breath, hiving, then gets bigger. they put east east. and she used to sell this, you know, in a lot of women, they bought. you mentioned your father died when you were young. how old were you? i was about 12, 11, 12 years. i was old when my father died. and when my father died, you know, i went to, to a job, you know, like this, i was very relished, very orthodox. i used to very, you know, i had, i had, you know, i was very, and then she, i went to another teacher, do to melamis, motion melamis, you know, bigger. but we see in public comment, you know, you know, i just learned the story, you know, and still, you know, so many years, 56, i never looked and i remember, you know, better than it. now when i went away, that, for a job, i went away from a job, you know, commercial, commercial, commercial, i used to, we used to make the top, the top stitching by the machine, you understand? after, after i made good, i got a, a monkey, he was a family, a cousins, he was a blocker, a testament. he used to make roof, roofing. you know, in there, in point, when they built horses, they make roofs with tints, you know, in, if i devoted, they make, you know, the, the waters. are you called this? yeah, this, i used to make, he used to take me, i used to make, you know, he paid me 10, it's 10, it's 10, it's my mother used to live two, three weeks, 10, it's she give me a week, 10, it's, and i ate it. you know, it was a lot of children, you know, a lot of children, the tattoo died, they went away, i got family in lunch, they went away there. and my mother, she got a small child, there was two years, you know, and i was meeting, with them, with them, child in home, in their own sisters, they went away to lunch. can you tell me about your sisters and your brother? yeah, the sisters, you see, the sisters, they went away, when, when before the board, there was in lunch, they restored my mother, mother was very happy, the children, the family, she got family in lunch, you know, the children they went there, to lunch. now i was met my younger boy, younger brother, i was there. can you give me the names of your sisters? my sisters is the outer sister was martin, martin martin, like this call, and the second was pale, and i'm the third, and the reason was after me, rose was of the sister, in the brother was show, show. this, now i got the three sisters, it's martin, pale, rose. what was the difference in age between you and each with me and the sisters and brother? but two years, you see, i'm born in 1922, the other sister is born in 1925, in the outer sister is born in 16, 1950, no 1960. i've been in peru for two years, in the brother, you know, i know he's born in 1932, when my father died, but 32, maybe he was about three years old. when i went away he was older, maybe. what language was spoken at home? oh, yiddish. but out on the street, you speak english. in the street, yiddish, in the end of my life, i see a poet sometime, you know, i spoke polish, i spoke polish very good. i went to public school too, went for a great book. what kind of books and newspapers were in your home? oh, for me, books, you know, i got, you know, julian was, i got max gorges, i got the russian pushkins, tolstoyes, you know, all yiddish, just i, my father, my father, you know, allowed me to read these books, you understand? he told me this is not good, this is not good, the yiddish, i used to took the library and the books. max gorges, i used to talk to this, i was very, since i was ten years, 11 years, i used to read so many books. i was all translated into yiddish. even god's a conserved doctor, hugo, you know, my brother, i used to read dr. yookas, the french writer, i used to read in yiddish, in john valjean, in the distance. i was very interested in reading, i was reading a lot. even here, i used to read, you know, yiddish books, you know, i learned a little english, not english, you know. you mentioned you attended public school? yeah, i, public school, four, four class. so what grade did you, four, four, four, four, four, grade? and there were jews and non-jews together. there was jews, no jews together. did you experience any anti-semitism in school? oh, yeah. every day when i went to school, there, you know, always the polyester, most always criticized, you know, you are dirty, dirty jew, very anti-in every time that's right. this was outside school. just outside. and after, when we went outside, you know, we got fights. i couldn't stand, you understand that all this, you know, this, i used to fight, and they called me, my daughter should have come. the family, the family, the mom is coming, you know, the picture said me away from school, you know. you know, it's, i was right. they were right. always was right. but they started this, everything, it was, no, it wasn't a good sense. they were, no good. did you have, i'm sorry, did you have any friends that were non-jewish? no friends. just, you know, you know, why? but my uncle, my father, he was a 10th smith he used to work for going big, you understand? this is the reason i meet them, but i was working with them. they used to work, my uncle used to take the christian, you know, to work for them. and i used to work, then i was working with them. yeah, i meet many times, now, boys, very big and decent. since i was, i tell you, since i was six years old, seven years old, always, even my state, you know, in your cup of your jita, jita, perseve, don't buy by the jewish, for the most jewish, they got stores, you understand? they got to drink, you say, restaurants, snacks, you know, go, go in, then they get coming. and always when they come in, it always fights was there. in bar, they break everything, now in my state of mind, it was, you know, i tell you, a few boys, you know, they call bagullis, you know, what's about good, they got horse, bogey, they, yeah, in they wait for them, and they go in the eat the she starts, or the days, something, and they make, pay a few boys, you know, they, it was quite, they never was afraid, not like this, the jewish afraid to go in night, even i was there, you know, to go in this section, not the section, but they, nobody, like, like he was afraid to go and have him in night, this time, you know, this is that, like this was there, very, very, very, in this i can tell you, you see, but i feel, you know, what they do, when they do to the jewish, when hitler was come, always, you know what they say before the war, hitler is coming to you, they kill you, this, before this was in 1938, when a lot of germans, they run away from germany, and they was coming to poland, they, they, my sabjo, you know, in this, goisades, you know, in this, in this is the reason my heart, you know, i know, they built special, why not, i, i find out, why they built a concertrastic and, always important, all the concertrastic and, you know, my danne koshwenchen, in lublin, there is my dannek, you know, why, but the poets, when the hitler became, then they killed the old jewish, a lot, a lot of them. there was a tantra, he got a store in manufacture, so they was working, you know, christian, they was working, you know, after the hitler was coming, you know, they killed it, he got a bullet, they cut them off the bullet, and they took over the stores, this was in the first week, the first week, when i was there, you know, in, in the beginning they took over, they took over the store, not the germans, the product they took over, all the stores, but, let me bring you back a little bit because we're jumping ahead a little on far now about yourself, or what were you interested in sports when you were young? sports, yeah, i used to play, you know, sake, i used to play. it's to say i am my favorite organization, you know, drote, betar, the seniors. if you get a game, you know, i used to play back frontellen and sake and he used to play. yeah, i was interested. so these sports events were just played with other jews? yeah, metadagios. all jewish. and you mentioned different organizations that you in any particular organization? i used to belong to a musician, a dorabunem. my sister used to belong to ilgantrilang beter, the orchestra. i got all this discussion with the abaiian. you know, shavarazaya, midrong, the business arts, socialism, not coming. is india the democrat? we got all this discussion with the others. we used to fight the discussions. we used to fight the others. what other organizations were in zavikost? do you remember any other jewish zionist organization? yeah, the mizraj. there was a gordonia. oh, oh, oh. the gordonia, even communist. it's not allowed. it was not, there was a great. that was the most popular, which had the largest following. the bundt. bundt, this was the gasterfala, the urkin party. maybe you're here for zilba. when the point was, they killed, he went to england. they did not believe him. he went to england. zilba, he was a bundt, he was in center. he was a bundtist. he was the u.s. believement. he went to england, he was the saint. he told they killed jewish jews. nobody saved. they didn't believe him. he took a gun, zilba, and killed himself. now i believe him. this was... when you father passed away before you were by mitzvahd, were you? were you bomb mitzvahd? no. yeah, i bomb mitzvahd. after my father passed away. you bomb mitzvahd? yeah, i got bomb mitzvahd. yes, it... my father passed away. i was, i tell you, 11 or 12 years. i never got bomb mitzvahd. and it went after him. i remember my uncle. i got the uncle in the row and he took me and shew, you know, put the trillium and say that i still have bomb mitzvahd in my cup of mitzvahd. do you remember any social events that took place in zavikos, any plays or concerts that you call? yeah, there was, yeah, there was the organizations, the sinister organizations. they make the groups, you know. they used to play all this. they used to play, mitzvahd, joseph, mitzvahd, i love the brothers, you know. joseph, the brothers, they used to play. they used to play. i used to get all due. and sure, my life was a lot. soon i was a lot, a lot concerned to make. they rent and all jewish they went there to make, you know. the organizations, they used to make, because they used to play. yeah, it was very cultural. boy, so quiet, so small. no, so cultural, you know. it was everything, everything was there. steevahd, you know, if you're in the organization, if you're in libraries, libraries are such a library there. you know how many libraries there was? four, in such a small city. you know how i said, if you're in a, it was sak, bublutek, i said, bublutek, library. you mentioned that you had payers. yeah. would you consider yourself asitic? yeah, i was very, not asitic like this. no, i was, very very very. no, no, no, no, fly, i never, never in my life, never. where did you go? i remember my side, it was alive. it took me a, a lot. you know what, steevahd, small, but they belonged to the rabbi, a cedem. my side used to belong to rabbi minashal. he was orky for rabbi minashal. he was, you know, i say agabem. i don't, i don't say ning, you know, agabem, he used to, you see, the most religious women, if they know have children, they go to the rabbi, the rabbi winched them, that they went to the rabbi in my grandfather used to write, used to write, oh, you can go in this time, in this time, in this time to the rabbi. this is a agreement to rabbi. you mentioned the rabbi named minashal? yeah, rabbi minashal. where was he from? raishim, raishim, in polish is jesuf. raishim, this is galician. and he got, he got a son. he got a son. he was a rabbi, a rabbi, a roof in my cedem. zavíchos, mochal, horvích. his, rabbi minashal is the other horvích. now he, the zinn, was a mine cedem. zavíchos. was auschwitz, or had the brother, rabbi minashal, rabbi, rabbi from him. this was brothers, you know. he was in austria, austria, in the erlkin, the mosfen, raishim, in jesuf, the mosfen jesuf, you know. and this was succeeded. the mizahite took me always in them steba, steba, this is as i assume, for the cedem. the other, like nubavíchidaire is a trus nubavíchia, and there is, they used to be like everybody got, you know, this was succeeded. you know, i, we was very honored even though i got the sister, my sister, you know, so respect. there was ultimate, you know. so respect my father, i remember after children, you know. he was laying down. and we were selling a children. oh, shh. quiet. my father's sleepy, i understand. well, mr. bechlo, we're going to stop now to change the tape. alright.