mae'n enw i yw manuel bekir. mae'n 7 ysgrifennydd 1996. rwy'n cyflawni adroddiad gyda samuel beckler. mae'r adroddiad yn cael ei wneud yn ffleshing, new york. mae'n enw i yw manuel bekir. mae'n 7 ysgrifennydd 1996. rwy'n cyflawni adroddiad gyda samuel beckler. mae'n 7 ysgrifennydd 1996. rydyn ni'n ffleshing, new york, a rydyn ni'n cyflawni adroddiad yng nghymru. mae'r adroddiad yma yn ymlaen mewn angen. mae'n samuel beckler. bekler. b-e-k-l-e-r. shmeel. shmule. shmule bekler. i'm born in 28th of march. march the third. yeah. march third, 1922. i'm 74 years. the city was zawichost. zawichost, this is powiat sandomierz. in poland. it's called powiat sandomierz. there was wojewódzwo kaleckie. powiat was like new york, queens, you know? queens, new york. and this was zawichost, sandomierz, now the wojewódzwo, you know, the elstla, it's kaleck, kaleck. kaleck. about 20 kilometre. from zawichost to kaleck it's 20, yeah. about 20 kilometre. and there was other cities too, you know. oztowcyn, ostrowiec, it's about 18 kilometre. ożarów, you know, all the small cities, you know. this was a small city, you know. we got, i got relatives in oztowcyn. zawichost was a small city. it was a 300 families, maybe a 4000, 4000 jewish people. three or four thousand jewish people. jewish, they used to live with the jewish altogether. why there is shul, synagogues, libraries in jewish, you know. and the most, the jewish altogether. and the poles, they live different, different. the house, i was got two rooms, you know. i was, there was a synagogue, the shul was there and i was living the shul, the glesa synagogue. the synagogue was, no, glesa synagogue. and i was living by the shul. we got there, we rent. somebody, you know. we rent with somebody, you know. and we was living there since i remember, you know. can you tell me about your family? let's start with your father. my father, my father, my father is yosef, yosef, yosef bekler. bekler. he was in yiddish, they say, milamit. now this is in hebrew. he used to teach children hebrew, you know, till chimish, russia. chimish, russia, this is the else. after, you know, they, they go to another, the children, they go to another, bigger. gomorran, toys'r fes, you know, rambam, you know. he was, from four year, five years till chimish, russia. till they 10, 11 years. 11 children, from five till 11. and after they went, the biggers. he was a hebrew teacher. this in yiddish is milamit, from small children. was he religious man? very religious, very religious. i mean, all children. he was five children, you know. now all was very religious. it's commisary day, you know, friday, even if he was poor, you know. all children, they was, they was on the table that we ate. even then there was nothing to eat. now all must be, you know, my father make kiddish. my son, my son, almost no one. was respect, was nice. even we was poor, very poor. i remember, my father, you know, he was milamit. a lot of people, they don't have money to pay. he learn maybe 30 children, 35 children. where was the shul? he went in the shul, there was a special, you know, in the shul. he took the children and he teach them there. our house was small for so many children. and he teach them there till, you know. and though he got pay, you know, maybe 10, 10 got pay. in 20, 22, then i got, you know, for nothing. and how he works, you know, he so hard, you know. he works from the morning, you know. when the children was coming, 7 o'clock, my father, he got up 5 o'clock. he went to the shul in daven and after, you know, the kinder, the children, they were coming. no, got, got a hard life. after my father, when, when it's finish, you know, he won't make more money. he was very rich, you know. and when they make weddings, you know, they used to call him, you know, he used to serve. and he used to cut the cake, you know. and he used to serve like a, a kelner, you know, in a restaurant. he used to serve, he used to make many kind of wedding. and everybody knows, they call, yosl mlamet. he is coming, he, he serve, serve us, you know. this, my father. now, now this i can tell you, was very poor, you know. my mother got two sisters in england. they sent us, you know, i remember, paiser, passover, and she sent this, of, of sickies, sickies. she used to send us money from england. my, my sister. and this is the reason why we survived. that's, this is the reason why. could you tell me a little bit about your mother? or what was her name? my mother, dobin, dobin. my mother, she was such a woman, you know. this is the reason why i can understand. here you have one child, you know, is so heavy, hard. and there my mother, five children, she used to work everything in home, you know. and, and she was a sick woman. 12 o'clock at night, she got up. 6 o'clock, 12 o'clock, she went to night, to bed. why? she used to like, like to stricken, you know. so dresses. and i remember my sister, when she got married, that they make cushions, you know. so she got goose, gooses, you know. i killed the father. how you, how, you know. and she make cushions for, for my sister. so always she was working, always. and here, you know, no machines, no washing, washing. she used to, you know, every month, you know, she went to water. this is a vase. they call in jewish a vase. it's a, a, and she used to, you know, like a, they hack the mesh. and they used to cook. they used to cook the, the clothes in pots. you know, they come. and she was always work very hard. and she was, my father died very young, young, you know. he left old children and they was very young, you know. and it was a hard life she got. i remember my grandma, i remember my grandma. my grandfather, i remember. she used to sell, you know, what they make, halos bread, hyven, then gets bigger. they put ist, ist. and she used to sell this, you know. and a lot of women, they bought. you mentioned your father died when you were young. how old were you? i was about 12, 11, 12 years. i was old when my father died. and when my father died, you know, i went to, to a job, you know, like this. i was very religious, very orthodox. i used to wear, you know, a hat, payalich, kafa. you know, i was very religious. i went to another teacher, dudl milamit, moshe milamit, you know, bigger. bubi mitziin, bubi kamen, you know. i used to learn the, the torah, you know. and still, you know, so many years, 56, 77, i never look. and i remember, you know, everything. very religious. now, when i went away there for a job, i went away for a job, you know, komashu mache. komashu mache, i used to, we used to make the top, the top stitching by, by the machine, you understand. of course. yeah. after, after i don't make good, i got a, an uncle. he was a family, cousins. he was a blacker, a tinsmith. he used to make roof, roofing. you know, in there, in poland, when they built houses, they make roofs with tins, you know. and then, if i devoted, they make, you know, the, the water. how you call this? grains. yeah. this i used to make, and he used to take me. i used to make, you know, he, he pay me 10 zlotys. 10 zlotys, my mother used to live two, three weeks. for 10 zlotys, he give me a week. 10 zlotys, and i ate there. you know, but it was a lot of children. and a lot of children, when the father died, i got family in lodz. so they went away there. and my mother, she got a, a small child. there was about two years, you know. and i was with the, with the child in home. and the old sisters, they went away to lodz. can you tell me about your sisters and your brother? yeah, the sisters. you see, the sisters, they went away when, when, before the war, they was in lodz. they restored. my mother was very hard for the children. the family, she got family in lodz, you know. the children, they went there, to lodz. now i was with my younger boy, younger brother. i was there. can you give me the names of your sisters? my sisters is the older sister was, uh, matl, ma, mani, matl. yeah, like this called. and the second was pail. and i'm the third. and roizen was after me, ro, roze was, oh, this is the sister. and the brother was shaw, shaw. this, now i got the three sisters. it's matl, pail, roizen. what was the difference in age between you and, uh, an age with me and, uh, sisters and brother? about two years. you see, i'm born in 1922. the other sister is born in 1925. and the older sister is born in 16, 1915 or 1960. yeah. in pail, about two years, yeah. and the brother, you know, i know he's born 1932, 1931. my father died at 32. but maybe he was about three years old. when i went away, he was older maybe, yeah. what language was spoken at home? all yiddish. but out on the street, did you speak yiddish? in the street, yiddish. and sometimes i see a pole sometimes, you know. you know. i spoke polish. i, uh, i spoke polish very good. i went to public school too. went for a grade. what kind of books and newspapers were in your home? oh, for me, books, you know. i got, you know, jules verneau's. i got max goldkiss. i got the russian pushkins, tolstoy's. you know, all yiddish. just i, my father, my father, you know, allowed me to read these books. you understand? he told me this is schmuck. this is not good. even the yiddish not. i used to took that from the library in the books. max goldkiss, i used the tolstoy's. i was very, since i was 10 years, 11 years, i used to read so many books. and it was all translated into yiddish. alt, multi-yiddish. even goes a concert. dr. hugo, hugo, you know. my buddies, i used to, i used to read dr. hugo's book. this is the french writer. i used to read in yiddish. and john valjean with this. it was very interesting in reading. i was reading a lot. even here, i used to read, you know, yiddish books, you know. at the. i learned a little english. and i read english, you know. you mentioned you attended public school? yeah. i, public school, fourth, fourth class. till what grade did you attend? fourth, fourth. fourth grade. fourth grade. and there were jews and non-jews together. yeah, there was jews and non-jews together. did you experience any anti-semitism in school? oh, yeah. every day when i went to school there, you know, always the polaks, the mostest, always they criticize gd, parshubit. you are dirty, yidd, dirty jew. very, and in every time was fights. this was outside school? this was outside. and after, when we went outside, you know, we got fights. me, me, the, why couldn't stand? you understand that always, you know, this. and i used to fight. and they call me, my tati should come. family. tati know, the mam is get coming, you know. the teacher send me away from school, you know. the, you know, it's, i know it was right. they, they right. always was right. but they start this, everything, you understand. no, was no good. since the war, so no good. did you have, i'm sorry, did you have any friends that were non-jewish? no friends. just, you know, you know why. but my uncle, my father, he was a tense with, he used to fago him, big, you understand. this is the reason i meet them, but i was working with them. they used to work. my uncle used to take the christian, you know, to work for them. and i used to work, too. then i was working with them. yeah, i meet many times. no, boys, very big anti-semitism. since i was, i tell you, since i was six years old, seven years old, always, even my shtetl, you know, new kupu you shidai, shid par shivit, don't buy by the jewish far. the most jewish, they got stores, you understand. they got, they got to drink, how you say, restaurants mit schnapps, no? go, they go and zenege kome. and always when they come, is always fights was there. in bar, they break everything there. no, in my shtetl, it was, you know, i tell you, a few boys, you know, they called balgules. you know what's a balgule? they got horse boggy. they had a wagon driver. yeah. and they wait for them. when they go in the yiddish stores or the this, when there's something, and they make, they a few boys, you know, they, they mean, it was quiet. they no was afraid. no, like this, the jewish afraid to go in night. even i was there, you know, to go in this section, the other section, where the day, nobody, like, like, here is afraid to go in harem in night. this time, you understand, like this was there. very, very, very. in, in this, i can tell you, you see, that i feel, you, you know, what they do, when they do to the jewish, when hitler was come, always, you know what they say before the war. hitler is coming to you. they kill you. this, before, this was in 1928. when a lot of germans, they run away from germany, and they was coming to poland. it can be my, my, you know, in this, in this is the reason my heart, you know, i know. they built special. why now i, i find out why they built the concentration camp. always in poland. the only concentration camp is in poland, you know. majdanek, oszwencz, in lublin, there is majdanek, you know. why? but the polaks, when the hitler, they came in here. then they killed the old jewish a lot, a lot of them. there was a tantzit cytrba. he got a store in manufacturing. so they was working, you know, christian, they was working, you know. after when hitler was coming, you know, they killed him. he got a boat and they cut him off the boat and they took over the stores. this was in the first week, the first week when i was there, you know. in, in the beginning they took over, they took over the store. not the germans, the polak, they took over all the stores and everything. let me bring you back a little bit, because we're jumping ahead a little too far now. about yourself, what, were you interested in sports when you were young? in sports, yeah, i used to play, you know. soccer i used to play. we, by, by every organization, you know, draw, beitar, you know, the team used to say, we got a game, you know. i used to play back, front, back, you know, soccer we used to play. yeah. i was interested. so these sports events were just played with other jews? yeah, with other jews. not, not all jewish was. and you mentioned different organizations. were you in any particular organization? i used to belong to chinese organization, draw, draw rabunim, this one. and my sister used to belong to irgun zvila, beitar, they used to, you know. i got all this discussion with here by, she told me, she told me, i'm, you know, shomratzaya, with draw, with this, this answer. socialism, no, not communism, you know, or the democracy, you know. we got all this discussion with us. she said we used to fight, with the discussions, we used to fight all this. what other organizations were in zavokost? do you remember any other jewish zionist organizations? yeah, mizrachi, there was mizrachi, there was, i tell you, gordonia, yeah, gordonia, all, all, all. gordona, buddhist, even communist, communist, it's not allowed there. in poland was not, no there was, there was. which was the most popular? which had the largest following? the bund. buddhist. this was the best follower, this working party. yeah. maybe you hear when, siegelbaum, when the poland was, they kill, he went to england, they, they not believe him. he went to england, siegelbaum, he was a buddhist. he was in senate. a he, no he was in senate, no he was a buddhist. he was, you don't believe me, though he went to england, you understand. and they told, they kill jewish, they, why nobody save, they don't believe him. you know, he took a gun, siegelbaum, and, and kill himself. now i believe him. this was, um. when you, um, your father passed away before you were bar mitzvahed. were you, were you bar mitzvahed? no. i passed, yeah, i bar mitzvahed after my father passed away. you were bar mitzvahed then? yeah, i got bar mitzvahed then. yes, it. yeah, my father passed away, i was, i tell you, eleven or twelve years. i never got bar mitzvahed. it was after i remember my uncle, i got the uncle in roazentake, he took me in shul, you know, put the trill in, say, but i still, i don't know, and i got bar mitzvahed. do you remember any, uh, social events that took place in zavokost? any, um, plays or concerts that you recall? yeah. there was, yeah, there was, um, the organizations, yeah, the zionist organizations. they make, in the groups, you know, they used to play all, all this, uh, they used to play, um, mechig yosef, yosef, with the brother, eleven brothers, you know, joseph, the brothers, this they used to play. they used to play, they used to play, all jew, shul, my life is a lot, um, my, shul is a lot, um, a lot, a lot, a lot concert they make. they rent and the all, all jewish, they went there to make, you know. the all organizations they used to make. b'kaba and they used to play. yeah. iaw, boi, it was very kultu gael. boy, so clay, so small, now so kultu gael, you know, it was everything. everything was there. eym, stybalaff, you know, fin töfin, fin organisation, fin libraries, libraries are such a libraries there. you know how many libraries there was? four, in such a small city, you know. yn y bôn, a dwi'n dweud, roedd yn fwy hysbrydol. mae'n dweud bod yna fwy hysbrydol. – oeddech chi'n siarad bod chi wedi cael peiaf. – ie. – roedd yn credu bod chi'n credu'ch hunan hysbrydol? – ie, roeddwn i'n fwy… – nid hysbrydol fel hyn, nid… roeddwn i'n hŷrwyr, yn hŷrwyr. nid fflaishigai, nid yn fy nghymru, nid yn fy nghymru. – oeddech chi'n darfyn? – darfyn i'n shtiblwch. roedd fy nghymru yn byw yn y shtiblwch. wnewch beth sy'n shtiblwch, s'mol, beth sy'n ymwneud â'r rabi? roeddwn i'n gweld hynny. roedd fy nghymru yn ymwneud â'r rabym yn y siale. roedd yn yr urgyn ar y rabym yn y siale. roedd yn, dwi'n dweud, agaba. dwi ddim yn dweud yn anglannig, dwi'n dweud agaba. roedd yn rhaid i chi weld, y rhan fwyaf ymwneud â'r rhan fyddai'n gadael, os nad ydyn nhw'n cael ddiddordeb, roedd yn mynd i'r raby, roedd yn mynd i'r raby. roeddent yn mynd i'r raby. roedd fy nghymru yn sianu, yn sianu, yn sianu, o, gallwch fynd yn ystod ystod ystod ystod ystod ystod ystod i'r raby. roedd yn dweud, dyna'r raby. – roeddech chi'n siarad am y raby yn enw menasha? – ych, ych, menasha. – roedd yn ddod o? – ryshe, ryshe yn y pobl, yw jesuw. ryshe, dyna'r galeci. roedd yn cael, roedd yn cael ei ffrind, roedd yn cael ei ffrind. roedd yn raby, raby arif, yn fynyddiad zawichost. moshella horowitz. mae raby menasha yn rhaid i'r raby horowitz, ond roedd yn ddweud bod yn fynyddiad zawichost. roedd o'sherif, o'r brade, raby menasha, raby ffroem, dyna'r brade. roedd yn ostroff, ostroff, ac roedd yn ddweud y maes i'r raby jesuw. y maes i'r raby jesuw. dyna'r gheisdyn. roedd fy nghyfnod yn fyny yn y stíbala. stíbala, dyna'r sôn, csidym, fel ljubavice, dyna'r ljubavice. roedd yn y stíbala. roedd pawb yn cael, ychydig, dyna'r csidym. roeddwn i'n ddiddorol iawn. roeddwn i'n cael fy sîr, fy sîr. roedd yna'r sîr. roedd yn oedol. roedd fy sîr. roedd fy fater yn ymwybodol, ar ôl y chydweithiau. roedd yn ymwybodol. roedd yna'r sîr. roedd fy fater yn ymwybodol. mr. beclau, rydyn ni'n mynd i ddod yn ystod nesaf i newid y sîr. diolch yn fawr. diolch yn fawr. diolch yn fawr.