take two ella davis. ella, we ended the last tape, but you mentioned you wanted to tell us something about your father. yeah, my daddy was in the man when i played music in that. me and children was all the time happy when i was playing, then i was fun in the house, and we challenged up the dance. and that was an accordion he played? yeah. and when you go to auschwitz, they had a room in there, and there were chipsy people in there and play music for the nazi. my daddy was in there too. and we got to please them. so my daddy was playing on a whole lot of chipsy people, make music, deep play good music, the chipsy people, with the, with the are you calling? i am. yeah. me and the little boy in auschwitz, you crying when you hear that guy playing. every time i met they were playing, they all were on it, so he listened, but they were nice. okay, let's back up just a little bit. when did you realize that a war broke out? did you know that before they picked you up? no. what did you pick up there? i was knowing that the world was breaking out, like me catechol every night in the car in the cellar on these ropes, pumps down. it was what this was. and there i know the world broke out. and then in the morning my mama said, you know, can you find us in the stone or more? let me hear it from the mother. myself, i don't know. and how did the outbreak of the war affect your daily life? do you remember what changed when the war started? yeah, we have to get up every night on the run to the next killer, to the next cell. my mama ate a whole lot of little babies. so that was, that you see that the world was out on me all the time with the little baby carriage, the go in the cellar before the house was cut, pumped. that's all. how was the food situation at that time? oh bad, you know, goodbye every single more. you had a black market then. you got to give something good, you get something good back. and that's what your mother did? yeah. all the time. you had something prettier than she went in a black market. and then you get that, you get that. did you go with her at any time? no, i know every day i did. did you all stay at home then? yeah. did you have freedom to walk around at all at that time? or did your mama say no? no, my mama said me nothing going that outside. we got to stay in the home. so we stay in the home, we see come back. were you ever taken away from your parents? no. do you remember were you and your family ever taken away from your town and put into a ghetto or a gypsy settlement? no, we never went there. and were you ever deported by train? yes, we did. okay, tell me about that. did you tell you when you go there and then they put you away? so we was nine children, my father and my mother. we went in there. this was the last way when we went. so that's what it is. when you go the last way and you went in the train, you know you came back no more. you could do what you want to. you can promise you, you promise you everything. you say we just stay a little while and then the detail through the back was not true. the lie. everybody was lying and tells stories. where did you come from to go to the train? was that from the jail? yes. and tell me what the conditions were like on the train. oh, this was bad. they had trains. everybody go in just like crowds. on the train where you sleep in there, sit in there. i was sleeping in there. when you put your suitcase in there, there were children sleep and the train. so this was very bad. how long were you on the train? we were, but for two weeks, under the train, the dinner had not all that. it's nothing. you have to do anything in there, in the train. the dinner had nothing. you can buy every three days, give you some drink and some day eat, a piece of bread. so this was very bad. now i hope it's never happened no more. was your family able to take anything with them when they went? yes. i want sister, my old sister, bobla. she used to, she posed the call to kumoyonya. you're not a fresh kumoyonya. and chips is very, very big deal there. when you go, you got the best everything. my mama packed that in. we took it, we'd have so made a little while something to eat. yeah. i never forget that. we ate for the grand mama cake, and stuffed food, smoked meat. we posed the key, but for my sister, very magical, the fresh kumoyonya. so my mama took everything with me. we took it, made a time in the time of the three days. but you don't get nothing with soup in there. and what else did your family take with them? oh, if you got money or to truly take that, buy the old time, need something with the gift, then you can receive. if you don't get, you don't receive nothing. and they let you keep that when you got to the table? or did you take everything? and what did you take? did you take your bear with you? yeah, i did took my bear. i did took my bear on the right side of the clothes. well, i came in from the concentration camp. so what was that like when you got to the concentration camp? what happened there? i would just, all you have to work through, you have to put your clothes off, your shoes off, on these torsed all through the underclothes. or then we went under, under, under thing in there, like over here under home in there, then they caught your hair. and then you went along line, they would give you a concierge in number. you know how much people they got, so much, number you got in your arm, that much people you are in there. so that's all. and which camp was this? this was auschwitz. this was the biggest concierge camp or declared people. and this the honor thing, were you get that number? and were you able to stay with your family at this time? yeah, i meet my mother. my daddy, my daddy went to work camp. so, so he was not with you in auschwitz? no, a couple weeks. then they took them and put them in the thing. if you are no gold, you get the gas. so i went. so once you got to auschwitz, did they put all of the gypsies in a special place? yeah, it was. was this called the gypsy camp? yeah, they used you for work. gypsy got to work. pulled a dead people out. they had aged offs. it's a long thing called there. the aged offs, you did the people the gas. give you a towel, a little bit of an impudure in there. people think they come back out. they say, no, they got to take a bath. most people, when they have a jewish people, they get them all. and then, they get them all. and then the gypsy have to come. people must touch each other and pull each other. and they have to pull them out. and part. and then they put them in the back out there. and then they drive from over there to the stove, and they have to put them in there and they find them. and they were stinking the dead flesh, which made them very bad. so after that was going everything. because that's a good. some gypsy kind, a whole lot. and they say, why did you do that? because no feelings for nobody, no more. i feel bad for them little children who did hit on the wall, against the outside of the wall. what happened? what did they do? they hit them against the wall, and throw them in the fire in them. i say, a whole lot of night i'm children. i never forget that. and this is bad. do my, i tell my children all the time, bring the gypsy, bring the children here. i got them all the time over here. i'll be scared. and what kinds of things happened to you and your family in auschwitz? tell me what life was like there. what's it like, el? you could know, they do nothing in the bus like el. and you know, when you were that straight, you know come out no more. you know come out no more. you know that the feelings you get. and you see all that stuff that's happening there. and you get the feelings, you know come out no more. you can believe it. you know come out no more. i don't know why i come out all the time to say, well my brothers and people, my mom or dad or my father, i say, why i'm living still. i ask that. jesus, i say, why i'm living still. i was not so good person, but you know take me. i tell the people that and they say, el are you, time is not here yet. i got something plain for you. i say, what? i want to know that. no. that's what people tell me in that old song, this just old people. sometimes you sit there, you know, just wait for that you die on this very bed. so this was, what happened? so while you were in auschwitz, you were with your family before your father was taken away. what kind of work did he do besides the ovens? did he do other kind of work? yeah, working on the street. doing what? meghan is straight. that the people can walk by. just fix your street. a whole lot of chips you did. and did your father do anything else? did he work in the kitchen at all? no, i was in the cantine. you know, cantine is the people buying stuff in there. and they, my daddy was working in there. in auschwitz. yeah. we call a cantine. you can buy sauerkraut, mouss, stuff like that when you ate some money left. we didn't find you money and take it away from you. i did take it, but money and stuff, gold and stuff, they took it. and then people, about to pull out the stove. they had cold tea. they pulled it out. they packed the tea out and get the cold out. then what chips he did through, my daddy did after the wait to. did your daddy do any cooking for the nazis at all? no, i had a cook. and you said he entertained. he was part of the band. what were the food rations like? bad. and i had no food. to give you something, some wood, a cow's eat, you make a soup out. and to give you that, they eat. did you do anything about that while you were there? yeah, i still like a rat. what kinds of things? i still brat. i still brats. if you and i ate a pot, you could not get enough food. so i still did. you know, give it to somebody. they give me a piece of brat for that you can get a ration. and when you know you know a pot, you know, can get your ration out. and i went out all the time by the polish people, stepping their parts by the was cooking. and then i picked them up on ron. i did that. all the time i was somewhere where i was supposed to be. did you ever get caught? yes. i was still the potatoes. what happened? everybody went there and got the potatoes. i was the leched one. went over there and i got caught. and i ate but i had the potatoes in my legs. and then i was in there. somebody got me. i said, i don't get the potatoes out so i got it out with the running steps. then i get me some like cow whoop. the tail for the cow. this was standing in the water in there, this old water. and after the cow, i made a potato side. i ate a potato. i got a swivet and i beat up. and then i asked me to run him. i said, yes. for my sister, she dying. she's hungry. and then i got 12 more. i went home. i either could walk no more. i would lay in my back. i could lay all of them in my stomach. i would mark behind. i was open. but it would hit me. and then i ate them all potatoes and cooked. then we have to see how we cook it. then you shoot your beside your head. make sure you're not getting cooked. so this is how old that... how old that was something you were not getting. i just hope that people here that show it at the changed mind. and i do know about the harm that we wish. while all the time i ate a wish, let people know what's going on in the ball. no, no, no, no, no promise. just do your thing. tell me about the accommodations where you slept. how many people were in this place? we had two beds. my whole family should leave them two beds. no matter. it's nothing usually in the floor. and what kind of clothing did you have at this time? i had clothes in my blue and white. a concentration kept close to give you a dress. this is it. when a person was in the night, sometimes you ended that building and get the proud and proud of the gas. when you got to give you shoes away, you know you got to get gas the next day. so you do that all the time. and what were the sanitary conditions like? where you went to the bathroom cleaned up? oh, this was bad. this was really bad. when you go in the toilet in there, like i was a little girl, i rock the whole night that i don't have to go out there. and when i went out there, then you see all the dead people laying up out there. all kind of funny faces. like on the eyes hanging out and stuff like that. on all the skinny chest bones in the skin. and every time i went out, i was thinking then people ran behind me. then i jumped in a bed in there. i don't know who was laying down there. sometimes my wake up, details to my mom and pick up your girl. she sleep there. and i was laying by her dead people. that was it. but i did. but i was scared. and then the next whole was she. i jumped in there and just laying in there with the dead. and i was scared. oh, that's what you do. and how did you clean up? did you have a place to wash up? yeah, wash. a wash thing. the wash left and right some cold water. you had no soap. you had nothing. all the other people did get some sand. and the rope that made the wash you, like you got a piece of soap. and did something happen to any members of your family there, like your brother? what happened there? my brother, my sister, was that my sister, she was so pretty. and every time we send that together, she came back to the direction. and she went up, i ate, tap her clothes. my children were always hungry. we took her finger and did like that. and we lit it up. why was it all over her clothes? why did you not like her? she was too pretty. so i don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. we don't know. this very bad, people don't like you. what did they do to her? they cut her hair off. make her look ugly. all that. how did they make her look ugly? they cut all her hair, all her hair. all done. pranha? pranha? yeah, pranha, we did our soup. or that thing where you will take it out, you put it on top of your head, on face. our mutuals don't know nothing better. we make that stuff up, the food needed. and what happened to your brother in auschwitz? my brother, nothing happened. hey, chester. hey, old come help, mr. d. my brother. what about your little brother? oh, my little brother. this was like that, ever sick. on every night, the people coming in can put the chocolate milk down, and that man came in with him, and put some poison in there. my mama said to his children, he said, let the chocolate milk for you, so he said, let's go. so, we went there. next day, the boy was dead, and all other children were. so, me got to be thankful that i live a cause of that. a whole other children died tonight. my, the chocolate milk was poison. yeah, this was my little brother, florian. and what happened with your mother after she saw that? well, she, she posted a camera, the boy down there, to the underworld world was dead. she could not do it. she was sick then. she was sick. she could not believe it has happened then. and then later, that man come all the time, buy me something. then my mama and her children see it no more. me, me children got their own med. so, that's what. and did you go to school at all while you were there? no. i never see a pencil or piece of paper. did you have any oral education? did anybody talk to you? the, the, the, the nuns, yeah? what did they tell you? the nuns said that the world, we finished pretty soon. me asked about that fire, that's married. and she said, look, look at that, that smoke. go straight to jesus out there. they all be anxious. they were teachers. they teach us out of the barbeds. our main children, our main people, mena know that. they make us mad. they talk like that. me look with some, they get out. and they talk about stuff like that. they're everybody that gets there. and they believe, no. our them nuns, they ask good people. they went outside. they could go outside. and make him come in his job and come back in. this was hard. you know what it was in there? did you start to come back? did you speak german in the camp or did you speak romani? we speak romani. and were you able to communicate with anybody outside of your camp? no. did you talk to any of the jewish prisoners or anything like this? sometimes we speak. you know when they was coming by or like machine three days outside. okay, we're going to stop the tape right here. okay. thank you. thank you.