take 2, ella davis. ella, we ended the last tape, but you mentioned you wanted to tell us something about your father. yeah, my daddy was, had an intimate when i play music in that. my children was all the time happy when i was playing. then it was fun in the house. we changed up the dance. and that was an accordion he played? yeah, when you go to auschwitz, they had like a room in there. there was gypsy people in there playing music for the nazis. my daddy was in there too. we got to please them. so my daddy was playing on a whole lot of gypsy people, make music. he played good music, the gypsy people. with the, how you call it? violin. yeah. we had a little boy in auschwitz. you crying when you heard that guy playing. every time when they play, we always running to him and listen what they play. this was nice. okay, let's back up just a little bit. when did you realize that a war broke out? did you know that before they picked you up? no. when they picked us up there, i was knowing that the war was breaking out. we got to go every night in the cellar. and the door bounced down. that's what this was. and there i know the war broke out. and then in the morning my mom would say, you know, can't buy nothing in the store no more. then we heard from the mother. myself, i don't know. and how did the outbreak of the war affect your daily life? do you remember what changed when the war started? yeah, we have to get up every night and run to the next cellar. to the next cell. my mom had a whole lot of little babies. so that was, that you see that the war was out. we would run all the time with the little baby carriage to go in the cellar before the houses got bombed. that's all. how was the food situation at that time? oh, bad. you could buy everything no more. you had a black market then. you got to give something good, you get something good back. and that's what your mother did? yeah, all the time. we had something pretty or something, then she went in the black market. and then you keep that, you get that. did you go with her at any time? no, i don't have any with her then. did you all stay at home then? yeah. did you have freedom to walk around at all at that time? or did your mama say no? no, my mama said we not can go on the outside. we got to stay in the home. so we stay in the home, then she come back. were you ever taken away from your parents? no. do you remember, were you and your family ever taken away from your town and put into a ghetto or a gypsy settlement? no, we never went there. and were you ever deported by train? yes, we did. okay, tell me about that. they tell you when you go there, and then they put you away. so we was nine children, my father, my mother. we went in there. this was the last way when we went. so that's what it is. when you go the last way, when you went in the train, you know you no came back no more. you could do what you want to. they can promise you, they promise you everything. they say we stay a little while, and then they take you through the back. but it's not true. they lie. everybody was lying and telling stories. where did you come from to go to the train? was that from the jail? yes. and tell me what the conditions were like on the train. oh, this was bad. they had trains where everybody go in just like cows. on the train where you sleep in there, you sit in there. i was sleeping in top when you put your suitcase in top. then we children sleep on the train. so this was very bad. how long were you on the train? we was what? about two weeks on the train. dina had no toilets, nothing. you have to do do in the thing in there, in the train. dina had nothing. she come by every three days, give you some drink and some to eat, a piece of bread. so this was very bad. and i hope it never happened no more. was your family able to take anything with them when they went? yes. my one sister, my older sister, poplar, she used to go, she post a call to come on you. you know the fresh come on you? and chips is very, very particular there. when you go, you got the best everything. my mama packed that in. we took it with us so we ate a little while, something to eat. yeah, so i know that. i never forget that. we ate for our grandmama cake and stuffed food, smokin' meat. we post a key bit for my sister when she go the fresh come on you. so my mama took everything with her. we took it with the train and there was the feeders. while you don't get nothing with soup in there. and what else did your family take with them? oh, if you got money or jewelry, they take that. while the older time need something with the gift, then you can receive. if you no gift, you no receive nothing. and they let you keep that when you got to the camp? no, they take everything. and what did you take? did you take your bear with you? yeah, they took my bear. they took my bear and threw it to their clothes. while i came in from the concentration camp. so what was that like when you got to the concentration camp? what happened there? they put us all we have to walk through. you have to put your clothes off, your shoes off. and they throw it all through the underclothes. or then we went in the under thing in there. like over here under the room in there. then they cut your hair. then you went in a long line. they would give you the concentration number. you know how much people got. so much number you got in your arm. that much people was in there. so that's all. and which camp was this? this was in auschwitz. this was the biggest concentration camp where they killed people. and that's the under thing where you get that number. and were you able to stay with your family at this time? yeah, i'm with my mother. my daddy went to a war camp. so he was not with you in auschwitz? no, a couple weeks. then they took him and put him in the under thing. if you are no go, you get the chasm. so i went. so once you got to auschwitz, did they put all of the gypsies in a special place? yes, they was. was this called a gypsy camp? yeah, they used you for working. gypsy got to work. pull the dead people out. explain that. they had age stoves. with long things go up there. the age stoves, the people, the chasm, give you a towel, a little bit soap, and put you in there. people think they come back out. they say, no, you got to take a bath. most people went in there with jewish people. they guess them all. and then, they guess them all, and then the gypsy have to come. people must touch each other and pull each other. and they have to pull them apart. and then they put them in the back out there. then they drive them over there to the stove. they have to put them in there and they burn them. they were stinking the dead flesh. smell very bad. so after that was going everything. it was not so good. some gypsy cry a whole lot. they say, why they do that? they got no feelings for nobody no more. i feel bad for them little children, what they hit on the wall. against the, outside the wall. what happened? what did they do? they hit them against the wall and throw them in the fire in there and burn them. i see a whole lot of nighttime children. i never forget that. and this is bad. i tell my children all the time, when you go somewhere, bring the children here. i got them all the time over here. i be scared. and what kinds of things happened to you and your family in auschwitz? tell me what life was like there. it was like hell. you could not do nothing. it was like hell. and you know, when you walk that street, you don't come out no more. you don't come out no more. you know that feelings you get when you see all that stuff was happening there. and you get the feelings, you don't come out no more. you can believe it. you don't come out no more. i don't know why i come out. i all the time say, my brothers and people, my mama and my father, i say, why i'm living still? i ask jesus, i say, why i'm living still? i was not so good person. why you not take me? i tell the people then, they say, ella, your time is not here yet. i got something planned for you. i say, what? i don't know that. no. that's what people tell me in that oldest home. it's just old people. sometimes you sit there, you know, just wait for that you die. and that's very bad. so this was what happened. so while you were in auschwitz, you were with your family. before your father was taken away, what kind of work did he do besides the ovens? did he do other kind of work? yeah, working on the street. doing what? making the street that the people can walk by. just fix the street. a whole lot of chips he did at. and did your father do anything else? did he work in the kitchen at all? no, i was in the cantine. you know cantine is? the people buying stuff in there. there my daddy was working in there. in auschwitz? yeah. we call it cantine. you can buy sauerkraut, masler, stuff like that when you had some money left. we didn't find you money and take it away from you. but money and stuff, gold and stuff, he took it. and then people, both they pull out of the stove, they had cold tea, they pull it out, they break the tea out and get the gold out. that's what chips he did to do. my daddy did have to do it too. did your daddy do any cooking for the nazis at all? no. no, i had to cook. and you said he entertained. he was part of the band. yeah. what were the food rations like? bad. he did not have no food. he give you something, some, what the cows eat, they make a soup out and they give you that, they eat. and did you do anything about that while you were there? yeah, i steal, like a rat. what kinds of things? i steal bread, i steal pots. if you not had a pot, you could not get no food. so i steal that and give it to somebody. they give me a piece of bread for that you can get the rations. and when you not had no pot, you not can get the rations out. and i went out all the time by the polish people, step in that pots while they was cooking, and then i pick them up and run. i did that. all the time i was somewhere, but i'm not supposed to be. did you ever get caught? yes, while i steal the potatoes. what happened? everybody went there and got the potatoes. i was the last one. went over there and i got caught. and i had about 12 potatoes in my legs. and then while i was in there, somebody got me. so i put the potatoes out. so i got it out with the running test. and then i get me some cow poop. the tail for not cow. this was staining and the water in there is always water. and i have to count it. how many potatoes i ate. i ate 12 potatoes. i got 12 times beat up. and then i asked, would i want them? i said yes. but my sister, she dying. she's hungry. and then i got 12 more. i went home. i either could walk no more or lay on my back. i lay all of them in my stomach. my behind was open where it would hit me. and then... and then i had them all potatoes. i cook. then we have to see how me cook it. then they shoot you besides your head. make sure you can cook them. so this is a whole lot. a whole lot of suffering for something you can't get. i just hope that people hear the story that they changed their mind. and do nobody harm. that we are wish. while all the time i had a wish. let people know what's going on in the world. and no listen, no promise. just do your thing. tell me about the accommodations where you slept. how many people were in this place? we had two beds. my whole family sleep in them two beds. no matter, it's nothing. you sleep just on the floor. and what kind of clothing did you have at this time? i had clothing blue and white. a consideration kept close. they give you a dress. this is it. and a pair of shoes. and then in the nighttime, sometime, they empty that building. and get the people out and buy gas. and when you got to give your shoes away, you know you got to get gas the next day. so, they do that all the time. and what were the sanitary conditions like? where you went to the bathroom, cleaned up? oh, this was bad. this was really bad. when you go in the toilet in there, like i was a little girl. i rock the whole night. that i don't have to go out there. then when i went out there, then you see all them dead people laying out there. all kind of funny faces. like, on eyes hanging out and stuff like that. on all skinny, just the bones and the skin. and every time i went out, i was thinking them people run behind me. then i jump in a bed in there. i don't know who was laying down there. sometimes i wake up, it helps my mama pick up your girl. she sleep there. and i was laying by her dead people. that's what i did. while i was scared. and then the next old was, i jump in there. just laying there with the dead people. and i was scared. oh, that's what you do. and how did you clean up? did you have a place to wash up? yeah, wash. a washing. there was left and right some cold water. you had no soap, you had nothing. all the other people did, get some sand and rub that with the wash. like you got a piece of soap. and did something happen to any members of your family there? like your brother? what happened there? not my brother, my sister was dead. my sister, she was so pretty. and every time we send her to the gatoration, and then she came back, gatoration was in top of her head, top of her clothes. and me children were always hungry. we took her finger and did like that. lick it up. why was it all over her clothes? why do you not like her? she was too pretty. so i don't know. me no hate gatoration when she went there. then she came back and me got mad. me children. every time we sent you, me get nothing. it's very bad. people don't like you. what did they do to her? they cut her hair off. make her look ugly. all that. how did they make her look ugly? they cut all her hair, bald head. on, on. bead up. burn hair. yeah, burn hair with that hot soup. and that thing where you take it out, you put it on top of her head and face. me children no know nothing better. we lick that stuff up, the food, and eat it. and what happened to your brother in auschwitz? my brother nothing happened. air chest there. air all of them help me still. my brother. what about your little brother? oh, my little brother. this was like that. i was sick. and every night the people come in and put the chocolate milk down. and that man came in with his little pocketbook and put some poison in there. my mama said to his children, you can drink water. let the chocolate milk for you seek brother. so we listen to the mother. what she say, let's go. so we went there. next day the boy was dead. and a whole lot of children more. so me have to be thankful that i live because of that. a whole lot of children dies at night while the chocolate milk was poisoned. yeah, this was my little brother florian. and what happened with your mother after she saw that? well, she supposed to carry the boy down there to the other children where was dead. she could not do it. she was sick then. she was very sick. she could not believe it has happened then. and then later that man come over and say buy me something. then my mama no let us eat no more. me children got all mad. so that's what. and did you go to school at all while you were there? no. i never see a pencil or a piece of paper. did you have any oral education? did anybody talk to you? the nuns, yeah. what did they tell you? the nuns said that the world be finished pretty soon. me ask about that fire, that smelt. and she say look, look at that smoke. go straight to jesus up there. they all be ancient. they was the teachers. the teachers out of the bible. but me children, me people, me no know that. they make us mad. they talk like that. me look at first what someone. they get out. and they talk about stuff like that. that everybody got their underbelief, no. all them nuns, they was good people. they went outside. they could go outside. and make him's company's job. and come back in. this was hard. you know what it was in there. and she sure got to come back. did you speak german in the camp or did you speak romani? we speak romani. and were you able to communicate with anybody outside of your camp? no. did you talk to any of the jewish prisoners or anything like this? sometimes we speak. you know when they was coming by. like we stay three days outside. okay, we're going to stop the tape right here. okay. thank you. thank you.