today is july 13, 2019. today is july 13, 1998. we're interviewing ella davis. name at birth was viddich. interviewer is sheila rodin-novak. we're conducting the interview in columbia, south carolina, usa, and it's being conducted in english. my name is sheila rodin-novak. we're interviewing ella davis in columbia, south carolina on july 13, 1998. ella, would you please tell us your name and spell it for us. tell us your name. ella davis, geborah niddich. and have you ever been known by any other names? no. and what is your birth date? it's in 1934. and your current age is what? how old are you now? sixty-four. and what is the city and the country of your birth? stuttgart, germany. ella, tell us a little bit about what kind of a child you were. i was a little girl. i started going to school and then she stopped me. what are some of your best memories as a child? well, i was with my mother and my father in karlsruhe. my father was in the army. this was my, all my sister's brother was with me. what is your father's name? albrin niddich. and your mother's name? sophie birkefelde. and do you know how your parents met? no, i don't know that. how many sisters and brothers did you have? i got nine. i just got one brother now. and can you tell me all of their names? yes. the name was poplar. and then i came. and then maria giesler, kouno, and florian. and what kind of work did your parents do when you were growing up? my buying stuff and selling. and did you work? yes, i did too. you could teach when you did it. and what kind of work did you do? i sell the stuff for door for door. and what was your parents' national background? your father? my father was in the army, in the german army. and was he german? yes. and what religion was your father? catholic. and what about your mother? what was her nationality? she was gypsy. and what was her religion? catholic also. and did you have a favorite toy growing up? i had a bear. and did he go everywhere with you? yeah, i took him everywhere. what kind of things did you like to do as a little girl? play. did you have a lot of friends? no. we never had much friends. what kind of a neighborhood did you grow up in? in a normal neighborhood, most normal. were there gypsies in that neighborhood? yes, it was. and was there like a tribe? you know when you are gypsy, you got them trellas. and everybody hates children. they play gypsies. they had a bunch of children. we children met each other. we stayed together all the time. please see card was. this is the same. when they get you, you can't play no more. it's finished. you either can't go to school no more. they did nothing. only two kids went to school and you never go back no more. you just took you and put you away. before we talk about that, i want to know a little bit more about how you grew up, okay? tell me about your grandparents. oh, you was nice. were these your father's parents? yeah, my mother's parents. what were your grandparents' names? my father's mother? no, their parents. oh, i didn't know that. did you know your grandfather's name? no. the paol was him, an olga. my dad is father-mother. and what about your mother's? wilhelm. i don't know my grandmom's name no more. and did you spend much time with your grandparents? yes, i did. and now i had so many children's of me all the time, and my grandmother. do you have any special memories of your grandmother? did she do something special for you? yeah, she did. she was in a circus. she had snakes around her neck. snakes? snakes, yeah. so i know she did special work. i was in a circus. were you afraid of the snakes? no, i never was afraid. now, yeah. did you see your grandmother in the circus ever? yeah, i did. i did. and what about your father's parents? what did they do? they sell and buy. that's all what they did. do you have special food that your grandmother made? yeah, cookies and on. back, they did buy an onion cake. and we went all the time to her, but she back all the time. she was very nice lady. did anybody else live with you when you were a child? my sister. other than your immediate family? no. did your family roam at all while you were growing up? what did they do? did they travel in a caravan at all? no. did you have a regular house? yeah, regular house apartment. did any of your family travel while you were growing up? no. and what language did you speak at home? i speak gypsy and german. and did you learn any other languages? in the concentration camps. what languages did you learn? polish. no. all the time you hang out by the polish ladies. but it was by the kitchen working there. all the time we get some food there. so we was there all the time. like, they ate food and you talk to them. i learned bread, labor. this was where you learn. double, go faster. stuff like that you learn easily there. going back to your childhood, tell me how your family celebrated holidays like christmas. what was that like in your house? it was okay. we get special food. what kind of food? i'm a noodle lady. i like noodles. potato salad. sour crowd. food like that. my mama cooked special food. and did you get presents? yeah, me get presents. what kind of presents? a doll, a dress, pair shoes. me not got so much, so much the play meat. i want a doll or something small. did a lot of people come over to your house for the holidays? yes. my uncles, my aunties. what kind of stories were passed down in your family? did you hear stories from her? no. your mama didn't tell you stories? no, she didn't tell them stories. and do you recall any special activities that you did with your gypsy relatives? no. did you see yourself as german first or as gypsy first? i was chairman. and then later, i was gypsy while me not going nowhere. and what about your family? did they all consider themselves germans first? no, gypsy. and what about your father? my father went german. my love was the army. did he identify with the gypsies, your father? yeah, i talked to them. my father speaks a good gypsy. i was a little bit at it to learn from my mother. and we were talking then. my daddy no wonder that he talked with me, talk gypsy. everyone hide it. and what kind of a school did you attend? in a normal school. i went there, and they got me out of school. and what language did they speak in school? german. were there other roma and sinti students in your school? yes, but in there. was it a mixed class? a mixed class. do you remember any particular teachers? no. nobody made a special impression? no. did you have any experiences being registered or in a genealogical study by the germans? no. did somebody come into your school? yes. and what happened? this was civil people, they had civil clothes and but were our nazis. they took us out of school, make pictures and things after. fingerprint. yeah. they make the pictures. then the legends were taken home. this was old. they did it a couple days. come in and go out, come in and go out. take them out of school. and did they do anything else on you? no, they did nothing. they definitely did nothing. you just want to have the one who started to go somewhere. i was scared then. i was scared to tell my mother that. my mama all the time i said, i'll go to school in there and ask, why did you do that? so that was all. we see people up in the morning, four o'clock in the morning, knock on the door. the one was all out. my daddy and my mama, they were three for one. first two rounds, two rounds. then they say, we should get a registration. this was probably easy to get us. so all the chips stopped. we went there. we went there. they know everybody was living chips. they got us. before that happened, how were your relations, you and your family, with the godges? did you have relations? did you know them? no. did your father work with some? yeah. my daddy was working with them. did they ever come into your home? no. what was the name of the leader of your gypsy group? oh, i died in the concentration camp. i had some with my stomach. i could just eat milk and white bread. i died. my mama hit him on the head. who? my mother. well, she found out that they're telling us all. who told anu? a chipsie man. i was thinking i can save himself when i tell other people who was really good with chipsies. so my mama found it out and then she took it. she was needing one day. it was full of eddies. was this in the camp? no, this was outside. no. before the camp? yeah. the gypsies that your mother belonged to, did they have a clan name or a tribe name? no, just gypsy. was there a leader of that group, somebody that they went to for decisions about things? no. no leader of your mama's group? no. what kind of experiences do you remember of discrimination before the nazis picked you up? this was one story. and what else? any other stories you remember? i was, we was in the conjuration camp then. then they put all the people in the trailer, in the train. this was bad. before that, when you were still living at home, do you remember anybody doing bad things to you or to your family? no. just taking the picture and the thing up. and? yeah, the measure you face, they find it out what you are. chipsie or the german or the, they was looking for that. they did that. did anybody call you bad names? no, they said gypsies, the guy. and were there, did anybody get beaten up walking on the street or anything like this? oh yeah, the jewish people. they beat them bad up, them people. and what about your people? gypsy too, yeah. i was not that much. they hate, i think i met them. you see them from far away that they were jewish on the gypsies. do you know one of the gypsies in there? do you want to clean the people out? did you ever have to wear an armband or anything like that? no, i hate the one in the conjuration camp. but before that, when you were at the— no, i don't have to wear it. did you have to have an identification card? something that said who you were? no, i don't think so. what about your mother? my momma brought a hate one, i don't know. you need a paper, you need the pass. you know, they was the police and the nazis were standing there somewhere. then you have to show something that you can pass that way. did you have that kind of pass? no. but your momma did. yeah. and do you remember not being able to do anything? were you able to go to the park and play? no. you could not go there. when they picked you up, you were scared. you don't want to go there no more. they pick you up anytime when they feel like— they hit you anytime when they feel like they knew. did this happen to you? yeah. when i went to my school. what happened? so, you know, go there. when this happened to you, you know you were scared. right now, people are scared for that stuff. but you never know what's going on in the world. and do you remember a week in 1938 when a lot of the gypsies were rounded up and their belongings were broken up and taken away and stuff? what happened then? tell me about it. we just break stuff on the planet. then we start running. to one corner, to the other corner. just like a dog. you run there, run there, run there. it was just like you adopted to get you. that way the nazis could try to get you. and when they catch you, they put you in jailhouse and put you somewhere. and you all the time were scared. all the time. you no care. why just go around people? they take it, people put them away. do you remember seeing that happen? yeah, this happened. in the morning, they came. four o'clock in the morning, chest meeting with a truck. they take the people out of the house, put them on the truck and drive away. did this happen to people you knew? yeah, to my own auntie. and she went and that. and that to the polish people. and how do you call it? like, oh, i don't know how you say that now. it was nothing. it was just houses. they put them in there. this was the next way where you go. they take you out then and put you to the congregation camp. there was the train get filled up. this was the next way where you go. you could not go nowhere no more. how do you was lucky and got away? how if you got away, did you get you in the way later on? so you remember this week in 1938. do you remember seeing things broken and so on? yeah, they called it crystal night. and were the gypsies affected too? yeah, i was not that much like the jewish people. did they do it before this to the gypsies? i didn't know that. most of the time it was for the jewish people. it was the crystal night. they went in there and broke everything. they wrote the books, the good books, how to bring them. that's what they did. our gypsy was not that much. they got them and put you away and this is it. did you have to report to the local police, your family? yes, you got to. you got to tell them where you live. you got to tell them where you stay. thank you. how many people stayed there? how many you know? or did they ask you if there's more gypsy there? then they say, yeah, my cousin's there. then they pick them up later. so gypsy people don't talk much. did you have to go to the police yourself at all? yeah, i met my mother. i'm in there. and what happened to you there? they just scare you. when they finish scaring you, they let you go again. my momma took me then we went home. there were so many people in there you could not see nothing. everybody was hollering and crying. but they know they don't come back no more. were you or anyone in your family ever arrested by the police? were you in jail at all? no, just when they got us. when they got us, they put us there. this was just like a house, no? you go in there and stay for eight days. we still got time to put you to the congregation camp. was your whole family put into this? yeah. so tell me what happened. how did they get your family together? what happened? early in the morning, four o'clock, the nazis came. knocked at the door and tell everyone, the chips were with the children. my daddy said no. my daddy said, i'm working for the people. i'm in the army. i'm fighting for the country. and i give nobody out. then they got still out. so after that, my daddy had to go to while i take the picture down and drop it on the floor. the picture of who? of the hitler. i step on it, broke it. my daddy said, i also do that when i fight for the country. and i do stuff like that. so i got a break the picture with him sweet. and then we went with a truck in jailhouse in kaltzurum. me and my mama and my brothers and sisters, we was in one jailhouse in there. my father was in a room. before my father left the house, i had him scanned with him. and then where i was in, where i was, me and him scanned. i say, my children don't go nowhere. i tried to shoot us in the jailhouse. my mama went in the knees and said, not do it. not do it, i'll be leaving the law. and then my daddy was crying and putting his gun away again. and then we went with the back in the jailhouse. my daddy, it wasn't strong. my mama was happy i let them go back. since we all died in the jailhouse in there. and one of them let them go in the jailhouse. and the congregation kept my daddy. and all of them said, i'm in the army and fight for the land. only i did stuff to my family. so this was all. okay, we're going to stop the tape right here, okay? okay. okay. okay.