today is july 13, 1998. we're interviewing ella davis, name at birth was vidditch, interviewer sheila rodin novak. we're conducting the interview in columbia, south carolina, usa, and it's being conducted in english. my name is sheila rodin novak. we're interviewing ella davis in columbia, south carolina on july 13, 1998. ella, would you please tell us your name and spell it for us? tell us your name. ella davis, good boy, vidditch. and have you ever been known by any other names? no. and what is your birth date? say in the 9th of 34. and your current age is what? how old are you now? 64. and what is the city and the country of your birth? stuttgart, germany. ella, tell us a little bit about what kind of a child you were. i was a little girl. i started going to school and then you stopped me. what are some of your best memories as a child? well, i was with my mother and my father in karlsruh. my father was in the army. this was my, my, all my sister and brother was with me. what is your father's name? i've been with you. and your mother's name? sophie, where you're from? and do you know how your parents met? no, i don't know that. how many sisters and brothers did you have? i got nine. our d.d. and i just got born brother now. and can you tell me all of their names? yes. the name was popla in the nakem. and then maria, gizela, kuno and florian. and what kind of work did your parents do when you were growing up? my, my, my, and stuff and sell it. and did you work? yes, i did too. you get teach and you did it. and what kind of work did you do? i, i sell the stuff for door for door. and what was your parents' national background? your father? my father was in the army, in the german army. and was he german? yes. and what religion was your father? cadelic. and what about your mother? what was her nationality? and what was her religion? cadelic also. and did you have a favorite toy growing up? i had a bear. and did he go everywhere with you? yeah, i took him everywhere. what kind of things did you like to do as a little girl? play? did you have a lot of friends? no. we never had much friends. what kind of a neighborhood did you grow up in? in a normal neighborhood, must normal. were there gypsies in that neighborhood? yes, it was. and was there like a tribe? you know when you are gypsy, you got them trellis. and everybody, i hate children. spatial gypsies, you had a bunch of children. we'd meet each other, each day together all the time. please seek out those. and this is the same. when you get you, you look and play no more. it's finished. you know, you can go in school no more. did not get nothing. on d2 girls in the school, you can never go back no more. you just took you and put you away. before we talk about that, i want to know a little bit more about how you grew up, okay? tell me about your grandparents. oh, you, you are nice. would these your father's parents? yeah, my mother's parents. what were your grandparents' names? my father's mother? no, their parents. oh, i didn't know that. you don't know your grandfather's name? no. the pal was him. on olga, my dad is father's mother. and what about your mother's? will him? i don't know my grandmom's name, no more. and did you spend much time with your grandparents? yes, i did. my mom, i had so many children, so many old-time men to grandmother. do you have any special memories of your grandmother? did she do something special for you? yes, she did. she was a naturka's. she had snakes around her neck. snakes? snakes, yeah. so i know she did special work in a naturka's. were you afraid of the snakes? no, i never was afraid. now, yeah. did you see your grandmother in the circus ever? yeah, i did. i did. and what about your father's parents? what did they do? to sell, buy. that's all what you did. was there a special food that your grandmother made? cookies went on, baked potato pie, on onion, cake. and we went all the time to here, but she baked all the time. she was a very nice lady. did anybody else live with you when you were a child? my sister. other than your immediate family? no. did your family roam at all while you were growing up? what did you do? did they travel in a caravan at all? no. did you have a regular house? yeah, a regular house apartment. did any of your family travel while you were growing up? no. and what language did you speak at home? i speak gypsy. and jammy. and did you learn any other languages? in the country, i can guess. what languages did you learn? polish? all the time you hang out by the polish ladies. by the kitchen, all the time you get some food there. so we were there all the time. like, you hear the food and you talk to them? i learned a lot. this was where you learn. dubois, go faster. stuff like that, you learn easy. going back to your childhood, tell me how your family celebrated holidays like christmas. what was that like in your house? this was okay. we get special food. what kind of food? i'm a noodle lady. i like noodles. and potatoes are a lot. and sour crowd. food like that. they're my mama cooked it special, that food. and did you get presents? yeah, we got presents. what kind of presents? a doll, a dress, a pair of shoes. you know, got so much, so much to play with. i once in a while did you give me a doll or something? small. did a lot of people come over to your house for the holidays? my uncles, my dandies. what kind of stories were passed down in your family? did you hear stories from your mom? no. your momma didn't tell you stories? no, she didn't tell them. do you recall any special activities that you did with your gypsy relatives? no. did you see yourself as german first or as gypsy first? as german. and then later as gypsy, i mean i could go nowhere. and what about your family? did they all consider themselves germans first? no, gypsy. and what about your father? my father went german. my love was the army. did he identify with the gypsies, your father? yeah, i talked to them. my father speaks a good gypsy. i was a little bit addicted. i learned from my mother. only was talking then. my dad, you know, one that he taught me to gypsy. everyone hired it. and what kind of a school did you attend? in a normal school? i went in there. my father got me out of school. and what language did they speak in school? german. were there other roma and sinti students in your school? yes, but in there. was it a mixed class? mixed class. do you remember any particular teachers? no. nobody made a special impression. did you have any experiences being registered or in a genealogical study? by the germans? no. did somebody come into your school? yes. and what happened? this is what civil people, they had civil and close to our nazis. they took us out of school and make a picture on the thing after the fingerprint. yeah. and they make the pictures for us. and then the legends, they take us home. this was all needed as a couple days. communion go out. communion go out. take us out of school. and did they do anything else on you? no, you did nothing. you definitely did nothing. you just wanted to have someone who started me going somewhere. i was scared. i was scared to tell my mother that my mama would have raised her. then went to school in the end as why did you do that? so that was all perceived frequency up in the morning, four o'clock in the morning. on the other hand, the one who was all out. we were my daddy, my mama, he was right for one, first to round, then we saw a little bit of a characterization. this was a very easy ticket. so all the chips he stopped, for a long time, and found a house to stay there. only when there, on that day, he was there. before that happened, how are your relations, you and your family with the godges? did you have relations? did you know them? no. did your father work with some? yeah, my daddy was working with them. did they ever come into your home? no. and what was the name of the leader of your gypsy group? oh, ed, i, in the country, i came. i had some, with him stomach, i could just eat, really, he would buy bread. ed, i, my mama, he'd have made a head. who? my mother was he found out of that town on us old. who told on you? a chilzimene. i was thinking i can save himself when i tell other people who was, who was related with gypsies. so my mama found that out and then see, see two questions, and he didn't mind that i ate. i was all eddy. was this in the camp? no, this was outside. no. before the camp? yeah. the gypsies that your mother belonged to was there, did they have a clan name or a tribe name? no, judge gypsy. was there a leader of that group? somebody that they went to for decisions about things? no. no leader of your mama's group? no. what kind of experiences do you remember of discrimination before the nazis picked you up? this was one story, and what else? any other stories you remember? i was, we were in the conversation camp then, and then they put all the people in the trailer, in the train. this was bad. before that, when you were still living at home, do you remember anybody doing bad things to you or to your family? no. just taking the pigeon the thing up. and, yeah, did he measure your face? did you find it out what you are? gypsy or the jam and you were just looking for that? did he did that? did anybody call you bad names? no, they said gypsies. did you guys know? and, were there, did anybody get beaten up walking on the street or anything like this? oh, yeah, the jewish people. they beat them bad up. and what about your people? gypsy's too, yeah. i went up that much. did you ever have to wear an armband or anything like that? no, i had one in the contrasion camp. but before that, we were asked. did you have to have an identification card? something that said who you were? no, i don't think so. what about your mother? my momma probably ate one. i don't know. you need a paper. you need the pass. you know, the police in the nazi wash, they knew somewhere. and then you have to show something that you can pass that way. did you have that kind of pass? no. but your momma did. yeah. and do you remember not being able to do anything? were you able to go to the park and play? no. you could not go there. when they picked you up, you were scared. you don't want to go there no more. you picked you up anytime when you feel like, do you hit you anytime when you feel like you knew? did this happen to you? yeah. when i went to my school. what happened? so, you know, go there. when this happened to you, you know you were scared. i know people are scared for that stuff. but you never know what's going on in the board. do you remember a week in 1938 when a lot of the gypsies were rounded up and their belongings were broken up? yeah. they were taken away and stuff. what happened then? tell me about it. you just break stuff on granite. and then gypsies start running to one corner to the other corner. just like a dog. you run there, run there, run there. just like you, you adopt to get you. that way the nazi could try to get you. and when he gets you, you put your jailouts and put you somewhere. and this, you all the time was scared. all the time. you know, okay. my desk goes around. we put the details. we put them away. do you remember seeing that happen? yeah, it was happened. in the morning we came, four o'clock in the morning, chest meeting with the truck. we took the people out of the house, put them in the truck and drive away. did this happen to people you knew? yeah. so my own andy did that. and she went in that... and that... to the polish people. and in the higher color. and like... like... oh, i don't know how you say that now. the polish people, the polish people, the polish people, the polish people, the polish people. they took you out and put you to the polish people. they were there. the train did fill up. this was the way where you go. you could not go nowhere no more. how do you get lucky? how do you get away? how do you get you in the way later on? so you remember this week in 1938. do you remember seeing things broken and so on? yeah, they called it crystal night. and were the gypsies affected too? yeah, i was not that much like the jewish people. did they do it before this to the gypsies? i don't know that. our days were most of the time for the jewish people. this was the crystal night. and when they broke everything, they wrote the books, the good books, all the prinum. that's what you did. our gypsies wasn't that much. they got them and put you away and this is it. did you have to report to the local police, your family? yes, you got to tell them where you live. you got to tell them where you stay. thank you. how many people stayed there? how many you know? and then they asked you, some more gypsies there. and then they said, yeah, my cousin there, they depict them up later. so gypsies were not up much. did you have to go to the police yourself at all? yeah, i met my mother. i met there. and what happened to you there? did you just scare you? when they finished scare you? then they let you go again. my mama took me then. we went home. there were so many people in there, you could not see nothing anymore. everybody was all in crime. but they know they don't come back no more. were you or anyone in your family ever arrested by the police? were you in jail at all? no, just for when they got us. when they got us, they put us there. this was just like a house. now you go in there and stay for eight days. you still got time to put you to the conservation camp. was your whole family put into this? yeah. so tell me what happened. how did they get your family together? what happened? early in the morning, four o'clock, the nazi came on knock on the door. tell them they want the chit-sewoom with the children. my dad would say no. my dad would say i'm working for the people. i'm in the army. i'm fighting for the contrary. and i'll give nobody out. then he got still out. so after that, my daddy would have to go to while i'd take the picture down and drop it on the floor. the picture of who? off the heat. i'd step on it, broke it. my daddy would say, why i so do that when i fight for the contrary. and i'd do stuff like that. so i'd write the picture with him, and then we went to the truck and the jailhouse in the house room. on me and my mama, my brothers and sisters, we were in one jailhouse in there. my father was in the room. before my father left the house, i had him scanned with him. and then where i was in the room, my children were going to shoot us in the jailhouse. my mama went in the knees and said, not do it. not do it. i'll leave it alone. and then my daddy was crying and put him scunnabay again. and then we went to the back of the jailhouse. my daddy. i was in strong. my mama was happy i let them go back. since we all died in the jailhouse in there. and i wanted to let them go in the jailhouse and the contrary, i didn't get my daddy. but i'd say, i'm in the army and fight for the land. only i did do stuff to my family. so this was all. okay, we're going to stop the tape right here. okay. thank you. thank you.