take two ella davis. ella, we ended the last tape, but you mentioned you wanted to tell us something about your father. yeah, my daddy was in the men when i played music in that. my children was all at home, happy when they were playing. and they were fun in the house. we changed up the dance. and that was an accordion he played. yeah. and when you go to auschwitz, they had like a room in there. and there was chips you people in their play music for the nazi. my daddy was in there too. we got to please them. so my daddy was playing on a whole lot of chips you people. making music. he played good music. the chips you people. midar, midar, i you call. i'm in. yeah. made a little boy in auschwitz. you cry when you hear that guy playing. every time they're playing, they're always on it. so he listened. but definitely, they first nice. ok, let's back up just a little bit. when did you realize that a war broke out? did you know that before they picked you up? no. well, the prickance up there was knowing that the war was breaking out. they make article every night in the in the cellar. on the throne, bombs down. that what this was. and they were, i know, the ball pike out. and then in the morning, my mom would say, you know, can you find us in the stone or more? they may have been in the mother. myself, i don't know. and how did the outbreak of the war affect your daily life? do you remember what changed when the war started? yeah, we have the gay up every night on the run to the next killer to the next cell. my mom ate a whole lot of little babies. so that was that you see that the war was out. we were on all the time with a little baby carriage, the going in the cellar before the house is cut bomb. this all. how was the food situation at that time? oh, bad, you know, goodbye, everything no more. you had a black market then. you got to give something good. you get something good back. and that's what your mother did. yeah. all the time. you had something prettier than some than cement in a black market. and then you keep that. you get that. did you go with her at any time? no, i know it. we did. did you all stay at home then? yeah. did you have freedom to walk around at all at that time? or did your mama say no? no, my mama say me nook and go on that outside. we got to stay in the room. so we stay in the room. we see come back. were you ever taken away from your parents? no. do you remember were you and your family ever taken away from your town and put into a ghetto or a gypsy settlement? no. you never been there. and were you ever deported by train? yes, we did. ok, tell me about that. did you tell you when you go down on then you put your way? so we was nine children. my father, my mother, we went in there. this was the lunch. the lunch was way when we went. that was this. when you go the lunch was way when you went in the train, you know you know came back no more. you could do what you want to. you came up almost you. you promised you everything. you say let me chase the little bile. and then the detaken through the back. must not run. the lie. everybody must lie. intelched always. where did you come from to go to the train? was that from the jail? yes. and tell me what the conditions were like on the train? oh, this was bad. did they get a train? well, everybody go in just like crowds. on the train, we usually went there. sitting there. i was sleeping in the when you put your soup and up, then we children sleep. and the train. so this was very bad. how long were you on the train? it was, but two weeks under the train. the united notall let nothing. you have to do in the thing in there, in the train. the united nothing. they come by every day, give you some drink and some day eat, a piece of bread. so this was really bad. and i hope it's never happened no more. was your family able to take anything with them when they went? yes. well, my one sister, my oldest sister, bobla, she's used to see poster called the comerion. you know the first comerion, you know? and she's very, very particular there. when you go, you got the best everything on my momma. in fact, that in me took it with us. so made little wild something, they eat. yeah, so my no that. i never forget that. me ate from the grand mama cake and stuffed food, smoking meat. she, we post the keep it for my sister. very magical, the first comerion. so my momma took everything with me to get me the time. there was a few eaters. while you know, get nothing with soup in there. and what else did your family take with them? oh, if you got money or choose it, you take that. by the old time, need something with the gift. then you can receive. if you know, if you know, you know, i see nothing. and they let you keep that when you got to the old. no, do you take everything? and what did you take? did you take your bear with you? yeah, i did took my bear. i did took my bear and the boys and the girls. why came in from the comerion comerion? so what was that like when you, when you got to the concentration camp? what happened there? there were many producers. all we have to work through. you have to put your clothes off your shoes off. or you've to hold it all through the underclose. or then we went under. now, under thing in there, like over here, under home in there. then you cut your hair. then you went in a long line. there would give you a conjurizing number. do you know how much people did cut? so much number you cut in your arm. that much people did you was in there. so this, this is all. and which camp was this? this was an auschwitz. this was the biggest conjurizing camp. or did you kill people on this, the honouring were you get at number? were you able to stay with your family at this time? yeah, i'm with my mother. my daddy, my daddy been to work camp. so he was not with you in auschwitz? no. a couple weeks. then you took him and put him in the car. and then you go and you get the gas. so i went. so once you got to auschwitz, did they put all of the gypsies in a special place? yeah, it was. was this called the gypsy camp? yeah, did you see for work and gypsies got to work? and pulled the dead people out. explain that. they made eight stoves. with long thing called the eight stoves. you did people do gas and give your tower a little bit so i'll put you in there. people think they come back out. they say, no, you got to take a bath. most people, when they are going to choose people, they get more. and then when they get more, then the gypsies have to come. people must touch each other and pull in each other. on the half the pull-em-a and part. and then they put in the back-up there. then they drive them over there to the stove. then you have to put them in there and the pranam. they were stinging the dead flesh. they smell very bad. so, after that was going everything. because that's a good. some gypsies cry no lot. only say, they say, why do you do that? they got no feelings for nobody no more. i feel bad for them little children. would you hit under the wall? can't sit outside the wall? what happened? what did they do? they did hit them. can't sit wall. the room in the fire in the pranam. i see a hole at the night. i'm children. i never forget that. and this is bad. do my child and all the time. when you come to the jail in the near. i got them all the time. i'll be scared. and what kinds of things happen to you and your family in auschwitz? tell me what life was like there. was it like hell? you could know, they're doing nothing in the bus like hell. and you know, when you were that straight, you know, come out no more. you know, come out no more. you know that feelings you get. when you see all that stuff, what's happening there? and you get feelings, you know, come out no more. you can believe it. you know, come out no more. i don't know why i come out. all the time say, my heart is in people. my mom or dad and my father. i say, by i'm living still. i say, jesus, i say, by i'm living still. i was not so good, person. by you know, take me. i tell the people that they say, ella, you time is not here yet. i got something plain for you. i say, what? i want to know that. no. that's what people tell me. in that old home. this just old people. sometimes you sit there, you know, just wait for that you die. i'm disheartened that you died. i'm disheartened that. so this was, i said, so while you were in auschwitz, you were with your family before your father was taken away. what kind of work did he do besides the ovens? did he do other kind of work? yeah, well, again, i'm destroyed. doing what? meghan is straight. that the people came up by. just fix the street. a whole lot of chips he did at. and did your father do anything else? did he work in the kitchen at all? no, i was in the canteen. you know, canteen is the people by and stopped in there. they're my dad, he was working in there. in auschwitz. yeah. we call a canteen. you can buy sauerkraut, maas, stuff like that, when your age's a money left. you know, find your money and take it away from you. buy the taker. buy money and stuff. gold and stuff. he took it. one of them people. buy the pull out at a stove. the head, call the tea, the pull it out. they put the tea out and get the cold out. then what chips he did to you? my dad did they have to do it to you. did your daddy do any cooking for the nazis at all? no. no, we're in a cook. and you said he entertained. he was a part of the band. yeah. uh huh. what were the food rations like? i was a little bit bad. you know, i had no food. to give you some food, some with the cows eat, you make a soup out, and to give you that, they eat. did you do anything about that while you were there? yeah, i still. like a rat. what kinds of things? i still, right? i still, parts. if you know how to eat a part, you could not get enough food. so i still don't give it to somebody. they give me a piece of breath for that you can get a ration. then when you know, you know, can get your rations. not when i went out all the time. i find the polish people stepping their parts by the worst cooking. and then i pick them up on the run. i did that. i was all the time, but somewhere, i was supposed to be. did you ever get caught? yes. why should you do the potatoes? what happened? everybody went down, got the potatoes. i was the leached one. when the wood didn't got caught. now i had parts, the thread potatoes in my legs. and then, while i was in there, somebody got me. so i put the potatoes out. so i got it out, put the run names there. then i get me some like cow whoop. the tail for the fruit cow. this wash-daining and the water in there, this old water. and now after the cow in it, i made a potato side. i had thread potatoes. i got thread time to beat up. and then, i asked what i want them. i said, yes, for my sister. she died. she's hungry. and then i got thread more. i went home. i eat a cookbook, no more. i put a layer back. i put a layer all the way to my stomach. i went behind and was open. boy, it put the heat in me. and then, i had my whole potatoes. then i had my whole potatoes. then i have to see how i cook it. then i should put the sides ahead. make sure you're not going to cook them. so, this is how i like the whole water itself for something you don't get in it. i just hope that people had to show it at the changed mind. i do not know about it. i wish, while all the time, i ate a wish, let people know what's going on in the bowl. i know, no, no, no promise. just through your thing. tell me about the accommodations where you slept. many people were in this place. we had two beds. my whole family should leave them two beds. no, no, no matter. it's nothing. usually, just in the floor. and what kind of clothing did you have at this time? i had clothes and clothes and clothes white. i had a concentration cap clothes. did you give your address? this is it. when i first used and then in the nighttime, sometime you empty that building and get the big powder and bright gas. when you got a good use of it, you know you got to get gas the next day. so, do you do that all the time? and what were the sanitary conditions like? where you went to the bathroom, cleaned up, all this was bad. there was really bad. when you go into toiletting there, like i was a little girl, i rock the whole night, that i don't have to go out there. then when i went out there, then you see all them there, people laying up out there, all kind of funny faces. like, on eyes hanging out, don't stop like that. on all the skinny, chest the bones in the skin. on every time i went out, i was thinking, then people run behind me, then i jumped in a pit in there. i don't know who was laying down there. sometimes i wake up, teach me my mom and pick up your girl. she sleep there. and i was laying behind there, people. that was that, but i did. i love a scale. and then the next old was a chumbin there, just laying in there with a date, and then i was going to go out there, what did you do? and how did you clean up? did you have a place to wash up? yeah, a wash. a wash thing, there was left and right, some cold water. you ate the soap, you ate nothing. all of the people did get some scent, and wrote that with the wash. like you got a piece of soap. and did something happen to any members of your family there? like your brother? what happened there? my brother, my sister, was that my sister, she was so pretty. and every time we send that, the get duration, and then she came back to the duration of our day. and they ate top hair, low hair, and she took a drink, and she was so pretty. and she said, i don't know. i didn't know. i didn't know that. then she came back to me, cut me out, meet your children. every time we sent you, we didn't get nothing. this is very bad. people don't like you. what did they do to her? they cut her hair off. make her look ugly. old dad? how did they make her look ugly? they cut only her hair, polly lady. on and on. bredop. prenher. prenher? yeah, prenher, we did our soup. the thing where you will take it out, you put on top hair, on face, on my children, no, no, nothing better. we lit that shelf up, the food needed. and what happened to your brother in auschwitz? my brother, nothing happened. atches there. it all that i'm helping you, steve. my brother. what about your little brother? oh, my little brother. this was like that ever a sick. on every night, the people coming in and put the chocolate made it down. that man came in with me, he came to the park, and put some poison in there. my momma said to me, my children, the kids drink water, let the chocolate made it for you, so we listened to him. but he said, it's so good. so i went there. next day, the boy was dead, and the whole other children were. so me got to be thankful that i live, because of that. a whole lot of children died in the night. my little brother, the man who was poisoned. yeah, this was my little brother, florian. and what happened with your mother after she saw that? well, she posted a kid at the boy down there and she said, she couldn't do it. she was sick then. she was sick. she could not believe that this happened, and then later that men come home and they'll buy me something. then my momma and her lady said, no more. a me, children got out mad. so that's what, and did you go to school at all while you were there? no. i never see a pencil, a piece of paper. did you have any oral education? did anybody know, talk to you? the nuns here? what did they tell you? the nuns say that the wall be finished with this zone and we ask about the fire that you mail, and she say, look, look at that smoke, go straight to jesus up there. they all be ancient. they were the teachers. the teachers out at the bar with some. our mate, children, maybe, but men are now that. the macons mad. she talked like that. we looked with some, the get out on detox, but stuff like that. did everybody have got their under belief? no. our nuns, the bus, good people. they went outside. they could go outside or make him's communist job and come back in. this was hard. you know what it was in there? you sure got to come back. did you speak german in the camp or did you speak romani? we should go morning. and were you able to communicate with anybody outside of your camp? no. did you talk to any of the jewish prisoners or anything like this? sometimes we should speak. you know, wendy was coming by or a like me staying three days outside? okay. i'm going to stop the tape right here. thank you. thank you.