Today is July 13, 1998. We're interviewing Ella Davis. Name at birth was Wittich. Interviewer Sheila Rodin-Novak. We're conducting the interview in Columbia, South Carolina, USA. And it's being conducted in English. My name is Sheila Rodin-Novak. We're interviewing Ella Davis in Columbia, South Carolina, on July 13, 1998. Ella, would you please tell us your name and spell it for us? What to do? Tell us your name. Ella Davis, Wittich. And have you ever been known by any other names? No. And what is your birth date? 10th of 9th of 1934. And your current age is what? How old are you now? 64. And what is the city and the country of your birth? Stuttgart, Germany. Ella, tell us a little bit about what kind of a child you were. I was a little girl. I started going school. And then they stopped me. What are some of your best memories as a child? Well, I was with my-- with my mother and my father, in Karlsruhe. My father was in the army. This was my-- I remember all my sisters and brother was with me. What, what is your father's name? Alvin Wittich. And your mother's name? Sofie And do you know how your parents met? No, I don't know that. How many sisters and brothers did you have? I got nine. Only, I, I just got one brother now. And can you tell me all of their names? Yes. Their name was And then I came. And then Maria, Gisela, and Florian. And what kind of work did your parents do when you were growing up? My-- they buying stuff and sell it. And did you work? Yes, I did too. You get teached when you did it. And what kind of work did you do? I, I sell the stuff, for door for door. And what was your parents' national background, your father? My father was in the army, in the German army. And was he German? Yes. And what religion was your father? Catholic. And what about your mother, what was her nationality? She was Gypsy. And what was her religion? Catholic also. And did you have a favorite toy growing up? I had a bear. And did he go everywhere with you? Yeah, I took him everywhere. What kind of things did you like to do as a little girl? Play. Did you have a lot of friends? No. We never had no much friends. What kind of a neighborhood did you grow up in? In a normal neighborhood. Was normal. Were there Gypsies in that neighborhood? Yes, it was. And was there like, a tribe? Or-- You know, when you are Gypsy, you, you got And everybody got eight-- children, especially Gypsies. They had a bunch of children. And we children met each other, and we stayed together all the time. was. And this is the same. When they get you, you no can play no more. It's finished. You not even can go in school no more. You-- you no did nothing. And they us from the school and you can-- you never go back no more. They just took you and put you away. Before we talk about that, I want to know a little bit more about how you grew up, OK? Tell me about your grandparents. Oh. They was nice. Were these your father's parents? Yeah. My mother parents. What were your grandparents' names? My father and mother? No, their parents. Oh, I don't know that. You don't know your grandfather's name? No. Paul, was he. And Olga. My daddy's father and mother. And what about your mother's? I don't know my grandmama's name no more. And did you spend much time with your grandparents? Yes, I did. My mama had so many childrens. And we, all the time, went to grandmother. Do you have any special memories of your grandmother? Did she do something special for you? Yeah, she, she did. She was in the circus. She had snakes around her neck. Snakes? Snakes, yeah. So I know she did it very special work. Well, work in a circus. Uh-huh. Were you afraid of the snakes? No, I never was afraid. Now, yeah. Did you see your grandmother in the circus ever? Yeah, I did. I did. And what about your father's parents? What did they do? They sell and buy. That's all, what they did. Was there a special food that your grandmother made? Yeah, cookies and-- and baked-potato pie and onion cake. And we went all the time to her while she bake all the time. She was really a nice lady. Who-- did anybody else live with you when you were a child? My sister. Other than your immediate family? No. Did your family roam at all while you were growing up? What they did? Did they travel in a caravan at all? No. Mm-mm. Did you have a regular house? Yeah, a regular house, apartment. Did any of your family travel while you were growing up? No. And what language did you speak at home? I speak Gypsy and German. And did you learn any other languages? In, in the concentration camp, yes. What languages did you learn? Polish. Now by all the time we hang out by the Polish ladies, while they was by the kitchen, working there. All the time, we get some food there. So we was there all the time. And like, they had the food. And you talk to them. And I, I I, learn bread, This was what you learn. go, go faster. And stuff like that you learn easy there. Going back to your childhood, tell me how your family celebrated holidays like Christmas. What was that like in your house? This, it was OK. We get special food. What kind of food? I'm a noodle lady. I like noodles and potatoes a lot and sauerkraut, food like that. And that, my mama cooked it special, that food. And did you get presents? Yeah, we got presents. What kind of presents? A doll and a dress, pair of shoes. We no got so much-- so much the playing with. A once in a while, they give us a doll or the something small. Did a lot of people come over to your house for the holidays? Yes. My uncles, my aunties. What kind of stories were passed down in your family? Did you hear stories from your-- No. Your mama didn't tell you stories? No, she no tell us no stories. And do you recall any special activities that you did with your Gypsy relatives? No. Did you see yourself as German first or as Gypsy first? As German. And then later, as Gypsy while we no could go nowhere. And what about your family? Did they all consider themselves Germans first? No, Gypsy. And what about your father? My father went German. My dad was in the army. So-- Did he identify with the Gypsies, your father? Yeah, he talked to them. My father, you know, speaks a good Gypsy, how a little bit, dad did, learn from my mother. And we was talking then. My daddy no want that, that-- that we talk, we talk Gypsy. He want hide it. And what kind of a school did you attend? The normal school. I went in there. But they got me out of school. And what language did they speak in school? German. Were there other Roma and Sinti students in your school? Yes, a lot in there. Was it a mixed class? Mixed class. Do you remember any particular teachers? No. Nobody made a special impression? No, mm-mm. Did you have any experiences being registered or in a genealogical study by the Germans? No. Did somebody come into your school? Yes. And what happened? This what. Civilian people, they had civilian clothes on, but were our Nazis. And they took us out of school and make picture, and You know, the-- Fingerprint. Yeah. And they make the pictures from us. And then they let us-- they take us home. This was all. And they did this a couple days. Come in and go out, come in and go out, take us out of school. And did they do anything else on you? No, they no did nothing. They definitely no did nothing. They just want us have-- they want us, that we go somewhere. I was scared then. And I was scared to tell my mother that. My mama all the time, raise hell then. Went in school and then asked why'd you do that? So that what this was, all. pick us up in the morning, 4 o'clock in the morning, a knock on the door. And they, they want us all out. They, they, they, they was-- we was-- my daddy and my mama, they was drive around first, to, to town, through town. Then they say, we should get to registration. This is why it probably was easy to get us. So all the Gypsies stop, no move around no more. And found a house, they stayed there. And we went there on '38. They was stay-- they know everybody who was living, Gypsy. They got us. Before that happened, how were your relations, you and your family, with the gadjos? Did you have relations? Did you know them? No. Did your father work with some? Yeah, my daddy was working with them. Did they ever come into your home? No. Mm-mm. And what was the name of the leader of your Gypsy group? Oh, he die in the concentration camp. He had some with him, stomach and could just eat milk and white bread. He die. My-- my momma hit him on the head. Who? My mother, when she found out that they are telling on us all. Who told on you? A Gypsy man. He was thinking he can save himself when he tell on the people who was, who was related with Gypsies. So my mama found that out. And then she, she took her shoes and hit him on the head. It was full headache. Was this in the camp? No, this was outside. No. Before the camp? Yeah. The Gypsies that your mother belonged to, was there-- did they have a clan name or a tribe name? No, just Gypsy. Was there a leader of that group, somebody that they went to for decisions about things? No. Mm-mm. No leader of your mama's group? No. What kind of experiences do you remember of discrimination before the Nazis picked you up? This was one story. And what else? Any other stories you remember? I was-- we was in the concentration camp then. And then they put all the-- the people in the trailer, in the-- in the train. This was bad. Before that, when you were still living at home, do you remember anybody doing bad things to you? No, Or to your family? No. She's taking the picture and the And-- Oh, yeah, they, they, they mash your face. They find it out what you are, Gypsy or the German, or the-- they was looking for that. They did that. Did anybody call you bad names? No, they said Gypsies, And were there-- did anybody get beaten up walking on the street or anything like this? Oh, yeah, the Jewish people. They, they, they beat them bad up, them people. And what about your people? Gypsies too, yeah, although not that much. They had-- a-- a thing on that, them. You see them from far away, that they were Jewish. And the Gypsies, they no want no Gypsies in there. They want to clean the-- the people out. Did you ever have to wear an armband or anything like that? No, I had one in the concentration camp. But before that, when you were on this-- No, I not have to wear it. Did you have to have an identification card, something that said who you were? No, I-- I don't think so. What about your mother? My mama probably had one. I, I don't know. You needed the paper. You needed the pass. You know? They, they was, the police and the Nazi was standing there somewhere. And then you have to show them something, that you can pass that way. Did you have that kind of pass? No. But your mama did? Yeah. And do you remember not being able to do anything? We were able to go to the park and play? No. You could not go there. And when they pick you up you was scared. You don't want to go there no more. They picked you up anytime when they feel like. They hit you anytime when they'd feel like hitting you. Did this happen to you? Yeah. When I went to my school. What happened? So-- so you not go there. When this happens to you, you know, you was scared. I know people are scared for that stuff. But you never know what's going on in the war. And do you remember a week in 1938, when a lot of the Gypsies were rounded up and their belongings were broken up? Yeah. And taken away and stuff? What happened then? Tell me about it. They just break stuff and burn it. And then we Gypsies, we start running from one corner to the other corner, just a dog-- like a dog. You run there, run there, and run there. And it was just like you, you a dog, they get you. And that the way the Nazi get right at you. And when they catch you, they put you in jailhouse, and put you somewhere. And just you, all the time, was scared, all the time. You no care. While they's go around, people they, they taken people and put them away. Do you remember seeing that happen? Yeah, this happened. In the morning, they came, 4 o'clock in the morning, chased with a-- with the-- with the truck and take the people out the house, put on top the truck and-- and drive away. Did this happen to people you knew? Yeah. To my own auntie, they did that. And she went in that-- in that-- to the Polish people. And in-- in that, how you call it? And like, a-- like-- oh, I don't know how you, how you say that now. Was no concentration camp. This was nothing, was just houses. And they put the-- them in there. And this was the last way, where you go. They take you out and put you to the concentration camp. They would, that-- the-- the train get fill up. And this was the last way, where you go. You could not go nowhere no more. Only you was lucky and got away. Oh, if you got away, they get you anyway, later on. So you remember this week in 1938. Do you remember seeing things broken and so on? Yeah, they-- they call that Crystal Night. And were the Gypsies affected too? Yeah, only not that much like the Jewish people. Did they do it before this to the Gypsies? I didn't know that. Only this was, most of the time was for the Jewish people. This was the Crystal Night. They went in there and break everything and throw the books, the Good Books out and burn them, that what they did. Our Gypsy was not that much. They, they got them and put you away, and this is it. Were-- did you have to report to the local police, your family? Yes, you got to. You got-- you got to tell them where you live. You got to tell them where you stay. And-- and they saying to you, and how many people stay there? And how, how many you know? And then they ask you, is there more Gypsies there? And then you'd say yeah, my cousin there, or the-- they-- then they pick them up later. So people, Gypsy people no talk much. Did you have to go to the police yourself at all? Yeah, with my mother, I went there. And what happened to you there? They just scare you. And when they's finish scaring you, then they, they let you go again. My mama took me there and we went home. Our-- there were so many people in there. You could no seen us anymore. Everybody was hollering and crying, while they know, they no come back no more. Were you or anyone in your family ever arrested by the police? Were you in jail at all? No, just once, when they got us. When they got us, they put us there. This was just like, like a house, know? You go in there and stay for eight days. Because they got time. They put you to the-- to the concentration camp. Was your whole family put into this? Yeah. So tell me what happened. How did they get your family together? What happened? Early in the morning, 4 o'clock, the Nazi came and knock on the door and tell them, I want the Gypsy woman with the children. My daddy say no. My daddy say, I'm work-- I work-- I'm working for the-- for the people. I'm in the army. I'm fight for the-- for the country. I no give nobody out. And then they got us, still, out. So after that, my daddy went-- have to go too, while he took the picture down and drop it on the floor. The picture of who? Of my-- of the Hitler, and step on it, broke it. My daddy, he said, why also do that when I fight for the country? And I do stuff like that. So I got a-- he break the picture with him feet. And then we went with the truck in jailhouse, in Karlsruhe. And me and my mama and my brothers and sisters, we was in one jailhouse in there. And my father was in a other room. And when-- before my father left the house, I heard him's gun with them. And then where he was in-- more-- where he was with the gun, he say my, my children don't go nowhere. They try shoot us in the jailhouse. And my mama went on the knees and say, no do it. No do it, Alvin. Leave it alone. And then my daddy was crying and put his gun away again. And then we went through the back into jailhouse. My daddy, he was then strong. My mama was happy and let us go back, thinks we all die in the jailhouse in there. go in the jailhouse and the concentration camp, my daddy, while they, all of them say, I'm in the army, and fight for the land? And Hitler did do stuff to my family. So this was all. OK we're going to stop the tape right here, OK? OK.