today is july 13, 1991. we're interviewing ella davis. her name at birth was vidich. her interviewer is sheila rhoden novak. we're conducting the interview in columbia, south carolina, usa, and it's being conducted in english. my name is sheila rhoden novak. we're interviewing ella davis in columbia, south carolina, on july 13, 1998. ella, would you please tell us your name and spell it for us? tell us your name. ella davis, keporene vidich. and have you ever been known by any other names? no. and what is your birth date? the same, 1934. and your current age is what? how old are you now? 64. and what is the city and the country of your birth? stuttgart, germany. ella, tell us a little bit about what kind of a child you were. i was a little girl. i started going to school and then she stopped me. what are some of your best memories as a child? well, i was with my mother and my father in karlsruhe. my father was in the army. this was my, all my sisters and brothers were with me. what is your father's name? albin vidich. and your mother's name? sophie birkefelda. and do you know how your parents met? no, i don't know that. how many sisters and brothers did you have? i got nine. i just got one brother now. and can you tell me all of their names? yes. the name was popler, and then i came. and then maria gisela, kuno, and florian. and what kind of work did your parents do when you were growing up? they buy stuff and sell it. and did you work? yes, i did do. you get teach when you did it. and what kind of work did you do? i sell the stuff from door to door. and what was your parents' national background? your father? my father was in the army, in the german army. and was he german? yes. and what religion was your father? catholic. and what about your mother? what was her nationality? she was gypsy. and what was her religion? catholic also. and did you have a favorite toy growing up? i had a bear. and did he go everywhere with you? yes, i took him everywhere. what kind of things did you like to do as a little girl? play. did you have a lot of friends? no. we never had much friends. what kind of a neighborhood did you grow up in? in a normal neighborhood. it was normal. were there gypsies in that neighborhood? yes, it was. and was there like a tribe? you know when you are gypsy, you got them treilers. on everybody, i had children. they had a bunch of children. we children met each other and we stayed together all the time. because they got us. this is the same. when they get you, you can't play no more. you can't go to school no more. they did nothing. they took us to the school and you never go back no more. they just took you and put you away. before we talk about that, i want to know a little bit more about how you grew up. tell me about your grandparents. oh, it was nice. were these your father's parents? yeah, my mother's parents. what were your grandparents' names? my father's mother? no, their parents. oh, i didn't know that. you don't know your grandfather's name? paul was him. olga, my dad, is my father's mother. what about your mother's? wilhelm. i don't know my grandmother's name no more. did you spend much time with your grandparents? yes, i did. my momma had so many children, so we all went to grandmothers. do you have any special memories of your grandmother? did she do something special for you? yes, she did. she was a circus. she had snakes around her neck. snakes? snakes, yeah. so i know she did special work. work in a circus. were you afraid of the snakes? no, i never was afraid. now, yeah. did you see your grandmother in the circus ever? yeah, i did. i did. and what about your father's parents? what did they do? they sell and buy. that's all what they did. was there a special food that your grandmother made? yeah, cookies and on. like potato pie and onion cake. we went all the time to her, but she back all the time. she was very nice lady. did anybody else live with you when you were a child? my sister. other than your immediate family? no. did your family roam at all while you were growing up? what she did. did they travel in a caravan at all? no. did you have a regular house? yeah, regular house, apartment. did any of your family travel while you were growing up? no. and what language did you speak at home? i speak gypsy and german. and did you learn any other languages? in the country i can guess. what languages did you learn? polish. all the time we hang out by the polish ladies. while they was by the kitchen working there. all the time we get some food there. so we was there all the time. and like, they had the food and you talk to them. i learned bread, lever. this was what you learn. dabai, you go faster. stuff like that you learn easy there. going back to your childhood, tell me how your family celebrated holidays like christmas. what was that like in your house? it was okay. we get special food. what kind of food? i'm a noodle lady. i like noodles and potato salad and sauerkraut. food like that. there my mama cooked the special food. and did you get presents? yeah, we got presents. what kind of presents? a doll, a dress, pair of shoes. we don't got so much to play with. once in a while they give us a doll or something small. did a lot of people come over to your house for the holidays? yes. my uncles, my aunties. what kind of stories were passed down in your family? did you hear stories? no. your mama didn't tell you stories? no, she didn't tell us stories. do you recall any special activities that you did with your gypsy relatives? no. did you see yourself as german first or as gypsy first? i was german. and then later, i was gypsy. well, i mean i could go nowhere. and what about your family? did they all consider themselves germans first? no, gypsy. and what about your father? my father went german. while i was in the army. did he identify with the gypsies, your father? yeah, i talked to them. my father speaks a good gypsy. i was a little bit addicted to learn from my mother when we was talking then. my daddy no one got me that. that he told me to talk gypsy. everyone hide it. and what kind of a school did you attend? the normal school. i went in there. because they got me out of school. and what language did they speak in school? german. were there other roma and sinti students in your school? yes, in there. was it a mixed class? mixed class. do you remember any particular teachers? no. nobody made a special impression? no. did you have any experiences being registered or in a genealogical study by the germans? no. did somebody come into your school? yes. and what happened? this was civil people. they had civilian clothes on but were our nazis. they took us out of school, make picture and finger up to look. you know them? fingerprint. yeah. they make the pictures in us. then they let us, they take us home. this was old. they did it a couple days. come in and go out. come in and go out. take us out of school. and did they do anything else on you? no. they did nothing. they definitely did nothing. they just let me go somewhere. i was scared then. i was scared to tell my mother that. my mama all the time raised her help and went to school in there and asked why they do that. so that part was old. we see people up in the morning, four o'clock in the morning. and knock on the door. they want us all out. my daddy and my mama, they were driving around first to town. then they say we should get a registration. this was probably was easy to get us. all the gypsies stopped, no more for us, no more for the house to stay there. and we went there. and they did it. they know everybody was living gypsy. they got us. before that happened, how were your relations, you and your family, with the gajas? did you have relations? did you know them? no. did your father work with some? yeah, my daddy was working with them. did they ever come into your home? no. and what was the name of the leader of your gypsy group? oh, i had some with him stomach. i could just eat millet and white bread. my mama, my mother, who my mother, was found out that they tell us old. who told on you? a gypsy man. i was thinking i can save himself when i tell on the people who was related with gypsies. so my mama found that out and then she took her shoes and even my under head. it was poor eddie. was this in the camp? no, this was outside. before the camp? yeah. the gypsies that your mother belonged to, did they have a clan name or a tribe name? no, just gypsy. was there a leader of that group? somebody that they went to for decisions about things? no. no leader of your mama's group? no. what kind of experiences do you remember of discrimination before the nazis picked you up? this was one story and what else? any other stories you remember? i was, we was in the conjuration camp then. then they put all the people in the trailer, in the train. this was bad. before that, when you were still living at home, do you remember anybody doing bad things to you or to your family? no, no. just taking the picture and the thing up. and? yeah, they measure your face. they find out what you are, gypsy or the german or the, they was looking for that. they did that. did anybody call you bad names? no, they said gypsies, the guy, no. and were there, did anybody get beaten up walking on the street or anything like this? oh yeah, the jewish people. they beat them bad up, them people. and what about your people? gypsies too, yeah. oh, not that much? they hate, i think i met them. you see them from far away that they were jewish. and they gypsies. they no want no gypsies in there. they want to clean the people out. did you ever have to wear an armband or anything like that? no, i had one in the conjuration camp. but before that? no, i didn't have to wear it. did you have to have an identification card? something that said who you were? no, i don't think so. what about your mother? my mama probably hate one, i don't know. you need a paper, you need the pass. you know, the police in the nazi was standing there somewhere. then you have to show something that you can pass that way. did you have that kind of pass? no. but your mama did? yeah. and do you remember not being able to do anything? were you able to go to the park and play? no. you could not go there. when they pick you up, you were scared. you no want to go there no more. they pick you up anytime when they feel like... they hit you anytime when they feel like hitting you. did this happen to you? yeah, when i went to my school. what happened? so you no go there. when this happens to you, you know you were scared. right now people are scared for that stuff. but you never know what's going on in the wall. do you remember a week in 1938 when a lot of the gypsies were rounded up and their belongings were broken up and taken away and stuff? what happened then? tell me about it. the gypsies were broken up and broken up. and then the gypsies started running from one corner to the other corner, just like a dog. you run there, run there, run there. it was just like a dog would get you. that's the way the nazis would get you. when they catch you, they put you in jailhouse and put you somewhere. and you all the time were scared. all the time. you no care. why just go around, be with the people and put them away? do you remember seeing that happen? yeah, it happened. in the morning they came. four o'clock in the morning, just with a truck. take the people out of the house, put on top of the truck and drive away. did this happen to people you knew? yeah, to my own auntie. we went in that, to the polish people, in the, how you call it? like, like, like. oh, i don't know how you say that now. was no conjuration camps, was nothing. was just houses. they put them in there. this was the next way where you go. they take you out and put you to the conjuration camp. the train get filled up. this was the next way where you go. you could not go nowhere no more. how do you was lucky and got away? how if you got away, they get you anyway later on. so you remember this week in 1938, do you remember seeing things broken and so on? yeah, they call it crystal night. and were the gypsies affected too? yeah, not that much like the jewish people. did they do it before this to the gypsies? i don't know that. most of the time was for the jewish people, this was the crystal night. they went in there and break everything and throw the books, the good books out and bring them. that what they did. but gypsy was not that much. they got them and put you away and this is it. did you have to report to the local police, your family? yes, you got to. you got to tell them where you live. you got to tell them where you stay. how many people stay there? how many you know? or did they ask you, is there more gypsy there? then they say, yeah, my cousin is there. then they pick them up later. so gypsy people don't talk much. did you have to go to the police yourself at all? yeah, i met my mother. i went there. and what happened to you there? they just scare you. when they finish scaring you, then they let you go again. my mama took me there and we went home. there were so many people in there, you could not see nothing. everybody was crying. they didn't come back no more. were you or anyone in your family ever arrested by the police? were you in jail at all? no, just when they got us. when they got us, they put us there. this was just like a house. you go in there and stay for eight days. you still got time to put you to the concentration camp. was your whole family put into this? yeah. so tell me what happened. how did they get your family together? what happened? early in the morning, four o'clock, the nazi came. knock on the door and tell him i want the gypsy woman with the children. my daddy said no. my daddy said i'm working for the people. i'm in the army, i'm fighting for the country. i didn't give anybody out. then they got us still out. so after that, my daddy went and took the picture down and dropped it on the floor. the picture of who? of the hitler. i stepped on it, broke it. my daddy would say, why us all do that when i fight for the country? i had to do stuff like that. so i got up, i packed the picture with his feet. then we went with that truck in jail house in kalturum. me and my mama, my brothers and sisters, we was in one jail house in there. my father was in the other room. before my father left the house, i had him scanned with him. then i was with my brother. my children would go nowhere. they would try to shoot us in the jail house. my mama went on her knees and said, not do it. not do it, albin. leave it alone. then my daddy was crying and put his gun away again. then we went to the back in the jail house. my daddy was staying strong. my mama was happy i let him go back since we all died in the jail house in there. i let him go in the jail house and the concentration camp, my daddy. by all the time i said i'm in the army and fight for the land, only i did do stuff to my family. so this was all. okay, we're going to stop the tape right here, okay?...