take two, ella davis. yes. ella, we ended the last tape, but you mentioned you wanted to tell us something about your father. yeah, my daddy was in the man when i play music. and that children was all the time happy when i was playing. then it was fun in the house. we challenged up the dance. and that was an accordion he played? yeah. when you go to auschwitz, they had like a room in there. there were cheap people in there playing music for the nazis. my daddy was in there too. we got the police there. so my daddy was playing on a whole lot of cheap people. he made music. he played good music, the cheap people, with the—are you calling? violin. yeah. we had a little boy in auschwitz. you cried when you heard that guy playing. every time when they're playing, we all was running to him and listen, but they're playing. this was nice. okay, let's back up just a little bit. when did you realize that a war broke out? did you know that before they picked you up? no. the pickings up there, i was knowing that the war was breaking out. we got to go every night in the cellar and these were all pumps down. that's what this was. there i know the ball broke out. then in the morning, my mom would say, you know, can you pry nothing in the store no more? then we had to run some other. myself, i don't know. how did the outbreak of the war affect your daily life? do you remember what changed when the war started? yeah, we have to get up every night. we run to the next cellar, to the next cell. my momma had a whole lot of little babies. so that was that you see that the war was out. we were on all the time with the little baby carriage, the car in the cellar, before the houses got pumped. that's all. how was the food situation at that time? all bad. you no could buy everything no more. you had a black market then. you got to give something good. you get something good back. and that's what your mother did? yeah, all the time. we had something prettier than she went in the black market. and then you keep that, you get that. did you go with her at any time? no, i don't have any time then. did you all stay at home then? yeah. did you have freedom to walk around at all at that time? or did your momma say no? no, my momma said we can't go on the outside. we got to stay in the room. so we stay in the room, we see come back. were you ever taken away from your parents? no. do you remember, were you and your family ever taken away from your town and put into a ghetto or a gypsy settlement? no, we never went there. and were you ever deported by train? yes, we did. okay, tell me about that. did they tell you when you go there and then they put you away? so we was nine children, my father, my mother. we went in there. this was the alleged way when we went. so that's what it is. when you go the alleged way and you went in the train, you know you never came back no more. you could do what you want to. they can promise you, they promise you everything. they say we just stay a little while and then they take them through the back. it was not true. they lie. everybody was lying and tell stories. where did you come from to go to the train? was that from the jail? yes. and tell me what the conditions were like on the train. oh, this was bad. they had trains. everybody go in just like crowds. on the train, were you sleeping there, sitting there? you were sleeping in the up there when you put your suitcase in the up. then we children sleep on the train. so this was very bad. how long were you on the train? it was about two weeks on the train. then i had no toilet, nothing. you have to do in the thing in there, in the train. then i ate nothing. they come by every three days, give you some drink and eat a piece of bread. so this was very bad. i hope it never happened no more. was your family able to take anything with them when they went? yes. my one sister, my oldest sister, bubba, she used to go to the kumoyonya. you know the first kumoyonya? and she's very particular there. when you go, you got the best everything. my mama packed that in when we took it off, so we ate a little while something to eat. yeah. so i know that. i never forget that. we ate for once a grandmama cake and stuffed food, smog and meat. we posted a kibbit for my sister. and she got the first kumoyonya. so my mama took everything with her. we took it with her in the train and there was a fetus. but you don't get nothing with soup in there. and what else did your family take with them? oh, if you got money, you'd surely take that. but the only time you need something with the gift, then you can receive. if you don't give, you don't receive nothing. and they let you keep that when you got to the camp? no, they take everything. and what did you take? did you take your bear with you? yeah, they took my bear. they took my bear on the road to their clothes while i came in from the concentration camp. so what was that like when you got to the concentration camp? what happened there? there were many pudders. all we have to walk through. we have to put the clothes off, the shoes off, and we throw it all through the underclothes. and then we went in the under thing in there, like over here under room in there. then they cut your hair. then you went in a long line. they would give you the concentration number. they know how much you got in your arm. that much you got in there. so that's all. and which camp was this? this was in auschwitz. this was the biggest concentration camp where they killed people. and this is the honor thing where you get that number. and were you able to stay with your family at this time? yeah, i'm with my mother. my daddy went to work camp. so he was not with you in auschwitz? no, a couple weeks. then they took him and put him in the under thing. if you are not good, you get the gas. so i went. so once you got to auschwitz, did they put all of the gypsies in a special place? yeah, they was. was this called a gypsy camp? yeah, they used you for working. gypsy got to work and pull that dead people out. explain that. they made edge stoves. we long thing go up there. the edge stoves, you need to be able to gas them, give you a tower, a little bit so, and put you in there. people think they come back out. they say, no, you got to take a bath. most people, when they were jewish people, they gas them all. and then, when they gas them all, then the gypsy have to come. people must touch each other, pull each other, and they have to pull them apart. and then they put them in the back out there, and then they drive them over there to the stove, and they have to put them in there and they burn them. they were stinking the dead flesh, smell very bad. so, after that was going everything. because that's a good. some gypsy cry in a whole lot. and they say, why they do that? they got no feelings for nobody no more. i feel bad for them little children, with the heat on the wall, against the outside of the wall. what happened? what did they do? they hit them against the wall, under the room, in the fire, in the i see a whole lot of nighttime children. i never forget that. and this is bad. and they were so scared. and they were so scared. and they were so scared. and they were so scared. don't forget that. and this is bad. i tell my children all the time, bring the children here. i got them all the time here, over here. i'll be scared. and what kinds of things happened to you and your family in auschwitz? tell me what life was like there. it was like hell. you could not do nothing. it was like hell. and you know, when you walk that straight, you don't come out no more. you don't come out no more. you know that feelings you get when you see all that stuff was happening there. and you get the feelings, you don't come out no more. you don't believe it. you don't come out no more. i don't know why i come out. i all the time say, my brothers and people, my mom and i and my father, i say, why i'm living still? jesus, i say, why i'm living still? i was not so good person. you take me. i tell the people then, they say, ella, your time is not here yet. i got something planned for you. i say, what? i want to know that. no? that's what people tell me in that oldest home. it's just old people. sometimes you sit there, you know, just wait for that you die. on this very bed. so this was what happened. so while you were in auschwitz, you were with your family. before your father was taken away, what kind of work did he do besides the ovens? did he do other kind of work? yeah, walking on the street. doing what? making a street that the people get involved by. just fix a street. a whole lot of chips he did. and did your father do anything else? did he work in the kitchen at all? no, i was in the cantine. you know, cantine is the people buying stuff in there. then my daddy was working in there. in auschwitz? yeah. we call a cantine. you can buy sauerkraut, mausda, stuff like that when you eat some money left. when you find your money, they take it away from you. why did he take it? but money on stuff, gold and stuff, he took it. and then people bought the pool out of the stove. they had cold tea, they pulled it out. they break the tea out and get the cold out. that's what chips he did too. my daddy, they have to do it too. did your daddy do any cooking for the nazis at all? no. no, and a cook. and you said he entertained. he was part of the band. band, yeah. what were the food rations like? bad. i had no food. they give you something, some... what the cows eat, they make a soup out. they give you that, they eat. did you do anything about that while you were there? yeah, i still like a rat. what kinds of things? i steal bread, i steal parts. if you never ate a pot, you could not get no food. so i steal that and give it to somebody. they give me a piece of bread for that you can get a ration. and when you never ate no pot, you know, can get your ration. not... i'm not going out all the time by the polish people. i step in that pot while he was cooking, and then i pick him up and run. i did that. all the time was somewhere where i was supposed to be. did you ever get caught? yes. well, i steal the potatoes. what happened? everybody went there and got the potatoes. i was the last one. i was over there and i got caught. and i had about 12 potatoes in my legs. and then while i was in there, somebody got me. so i put the potatoes out. so i got it out with the running stairs. and then i get me some like cow poop. the tail for not cow. and this was staining in the water and that is old water. and i have to count it how many potatoes i ate. i ate 12 potatoes. i got 12 times beat up. and then i asked what i wanted. i said yes. for my sister, she's dying. she's hungry. and then i got 12 more. i went home. i either could walk no more or lay in my bag. i lay all of them in my stomach. my mind was open where it would hit me. and then i ate them all potatoes. i cook. then you have to see how we cook it. then they shoot you beside your head. make sure you're looking cook them. so this is her whole lot. a whole lot of suffering for something when you're looking good. i just hope that people heard that story that changed the mind. do you know what they harm? that we are wish. while all the time i hate a wish. let people know what's going on in the world. no, here no, no, no promise. just do your thing. tell me about the accommodations where you slept. how many people were in this place? we had two beds. my whole family sleep in them two beds. no, no, no matter. it's nothing. usually they're just in the floor. what kind of clothing did you have at this time? i had clothes in blue and white. a concentration kept clothes. they give you a dress. this is it. and a pair of shoes. and then in the nighttime, sometimes they empty that building. you get the people who don't practice. when you gotta give your shoes away, you know you gotta get gas the next day. so they do that all the time. and what were the sanitary conditions like? where you went to the bathroom, cleaned up? oh, this was bad. this was really bad. when you go in the toilet in there, like i was a little girl, i walked the whole night. that i don't have to go out there. then when i went out there, then you see all them dead people laying up out there. all kind of funny faces. like on ice hanging out and stuff like that. on all skinny, chest and bones in the skin. and every time i went out, i was thinking them people run behind me. then i jump in a bed in there. i don't know who was laying down there. sometimes i wake up. he tells me, my mom will pick up your girl. she sleep there. and i was laying by her dead people. that's what i did. while i was scared. and then the next all was, i jump in there. just laying there with the dead people. when i was scared. oh, that's what you do. and how did you clean up? did you have a place to wash off? yeah, wash. i was washing, left and right, some cold water. you had no soap. you had nothing. all the other people did get some sand. and i hope that they wash you like you got a piece of soap. and did something happen to any members of your family there, like your brother? what happened there? my brother, my sister, was dead. my sister, she was so pretty. and every time we send her the decoration, and then she came back, the decoration was in her head, top her clothes, and my children were always hungry. we took her finger, did like that, and licked it up. why was it all over her clothes? why do you not like her? she was so pretty. so i don't know. we know her decoration when she went there. then she came back and we got mad with children. every time we send you, we get nothing. it's very bad, people don't like you. what did they do to her? they cut her hair off, make her look ugly, all that. how did they make her look ugly? they cut all her hair, all her head. on, on. braid up. brain hair. burn her? yeah, brain hair with that heart soup. and that thing where you will take it out, they put it on top of her head and face. and my children don't know nothing better. we lick that stuff up, the food, and eat it. and what happened to your brother in auschwitz? my brother, nothing happened. edges there. all the time help me steal my brother. what about your little brother? oh, my little brother. this was like that, ever sick. every night, the people come in and can put the chocolate milk down. that man came in with his little pocketbook and put some poison in there. and my mama said to her children, you can drink water. let the chocolate milk for you seek water. so me listen to the mother. but she said, let's go. so we went there. we went there. next day, the boy was dead and a whole lot of children more. so me have to be thankful that i live a cause of that. a whole lot of children die at night. but the chocolate milk was poison. yeah, this was my little brother, florian. florian. and what happened with your mother after she saw that? well, she posed a kind of the boy down there to the other children was dead. she could not do it. she was sick then. she was very sick. she could not believe this happened then. and then later that man come over, he said, buy me something. then my mama and i don't see it no more. me children got all mad. so that's what. and did you go to school at all while you were there? no. i never see a pencil or a piece of paper. did you have any oral education? did anybody talk to you? the nuns here. what did they tell you? the nuns said that the world will finish pretty soon. me asked about that fire, that smell. and she said, look, look at that smoke. go straight to jesus up there. the old be ancient. they were the teachers. the teachers out of the baptism. our children, maybe we may not know that. they make them mad. they talk like that. me look at the first words. they get out. and they talk about stuff like that. that everybody got their under belief, no? our them nuns, they was good people. they went outside. they could go outside. or make him come in his job and come back in. this was hard. you know what it was in there? you sure got the come back. did you speak german in the camp or did you speak romani? we speak romani. and were you able to communicate with anybody outside of your camp? no. did you talk to any of the jewish prisoners or anything like this? sometime we speak. you know when they was coming by or like we stay in three days outside. okay, we're gonna stop the tape right here. okay.