Tape two, Ella Davis. Yes. Ella, we ended the last tape. But you mentioned you wanted to tell us something about your father. Yeah, my daddy was-- had a instrument. When he played music in that. And we children was all the time happy when he was playing. Then was fun in the house. And we changed up the dance. And that was an accordion he played? Yeah. And when you go to that, through Auschwitz, they had a-- like a room in there. And there was Gypsy people in there who played music for the Nazi. And my daddy was in there too. We got to please them. So my daddy was playing. And-- and the-- a whole lot of Gypsy people make music. They play good music, the Gypsy people. With a-- with a-- how you call it? Violin. yeah. We had a little boy in Auschwitz. You crying when you heard that guy playing. Every time in there playing, we all was running to him, and listen what they play. That was nice. OK, let's back up just a little bit. When did you realize that a war broke out? Did you know that before they picked you up? No. When they pick us up, then I was knowing that the war was breaking out. When we got to go every night, in the-- in the cellar-- in the cellar, and-- and they throw bombs down. And that what this was. And there where I know the war break out. And then the-- in-- in the morning, my mama would say, you no can buy nothing at the store no more. Then we heard from some other. Myself, I don't know. And how did the outbreak of the war affect your daily life? Do you remember what changed when the war started? Yeah, we have to get up every night and run to the next cellar-- to the next cellar. And my mama had a whole lot of little babies. So that was-- that, you see that the war was out. We run all the time. We did a little baby carriage for going in the cellar before the houses got bombed. That's all. How was the food situation at that time? Oh, bad. You no could buy everything no more. They had a black market then. You got to give something good. You get something good back. And that's what your mother did? Yeah, all the time. We had something pretty to sell, then she went in the black market. And then you give that, you get that. Did you go with her at any time? No, I don't ever dare then. Did you all stay at home then? Yeah. Did you have freedom to walk around at all at that time? Or did your mama say no? No, my mama say we no can go on the outside. We got to stay in the room. So when we stay in the room till she come back. Were you ever taken away from your parents? No. Do you remember, were you and your family ever taken away from your town and put into a ghetto or a Gypsy settlement? No, we never went there. And were you ever deported by train? Yes, we did. OK. Tell me about that. They-- they tell you when you go there. And then they put you away. So we was nine children, and my father and my mother. We went in there. This was the last-- the last way, when we went. So that what it is. And when you go the last way, and you went in the train, you know you no came back no more. You could do what you want to. They can promise you-- they promise you everything. They say, we just stay a little while and then they, they take them through the back. Was not true. They lie. Everybody was lying and telled stories. Where did you come from to go to the train? Was that from the jail? Yes. And tell me what the conditions were like on the train. Oh, this was bad. There you had-- there you had trains where everybody go in just like cows. On the train, where you sleep in there, sit in there, I was sleeping in top the-- when you put your suitcase in top. Then we children sleep on the train. So this was really bad. How long were you on the train? We was, about-- about two weeks on the train. And they don't have no toilets, nothing. You have to doo-doo in-- in the thing in there, in the train. We no ate nothing. They come by every three days, give you some-- something to drink and something to eat, a piece of bread. So this was really bad. And I hope it's never happen no more. Was your family able to take anything with them when they went? Yes. But my one sister, my old-- old sister, she used to go-- she supposed to go to You know, the First And Gypsies will-- will be there. When you go, you got the best everything. And my mama packed that in. And we took it with us. So made a little while something to eat. Yeah. That-- I know that. I never forget that. It's-- we eaten on the train, mama cake and stuffed food, smoking meat. We supposed to keep it on the for my sister, when-- when she go the So my mama took everything with her. And we took it within the train. And there was it feed us. But you no get nothing with soup in there. And what else did your family take with them? Oh, if you got money or jewelry they take that. But they all the time need something, they to give. And then you can receive. If you no give, you no receive nothing. And they let you keep that when you got to the camp? No, they take everything. And what did you take? Did you take your bear with you? Yeah, they took my bear. They took my bear and throws it out clothes when I came in from the concentration camp. So what was that like when you-- when you got to the concentration camp? What happened there? There from, where they put us-- all we have to walk through. You have to put your clothes off, your shoes off. And they throw it all, threw the underclothes. And then we went in the under-- in the under thing in there, like over here, on the room in there. Then they cut your hair. And then you were in a long line. They would you give you your concentration number. They know how much people they got. So much, now what you got in your arm, that much people, they was in there. So that's-- that's all. And which camp was this? This was in Auschwitz. This was the biggest concentration camp where they kill people. And that's the only thing where you get that number. And were you able to stay with your family at this time? Yeah, with my mother. My daddy-- my daddy went to a-- to work camp. So-- So he was not with you in Auschwitz? No. A couple-- a couple weeks. And then they took him and put him the-- in the thing. If you will not go, they're going to gas him. So he went. So once you got to Auschwitz, did they put all of the Gypsies in a special place? Yeah, they was. Was this called a Gypsy camp? Yeah. They use you for working. Gypsy got to work, and pull the dead people out. Explain that. They-- we had eight stoves with long thing, go up there. The eight stoves, you did the people, they gas them, give you a towel and a little bit soap, and put you in there. People think they come back out. They say, no, you got to take a bath. Most of-- most of the people went in there were Jewish people. They gas them all. And then when they gas them all, and then the Gypsy have to come. We were-- was touching each hand and pulling each hand. And they have to pull them apart. And then they put them in-- in the back out there. And then they drive them over there to the-- to the stove. And they have to put them in there and they burn them. And they was stinking, the dead flesh. It smelled very bad. So after that was going, everything was not so good. Some Gypsies crying a whole lot, and they say-- they say, why, why they do that? They got no-- no feelings for nobody no more. I feel bad for them little children what they hit on the wall, against the, outside the wall. What happened? What did they do? They hit them against the wall and throw them in the fire in there, and burn them. I see a whole lot, at nighttime, children. I never forget that. And this is bad. I tell my children all-- all the time, bring the-- when you go somewhere, bring the children here. I got them all the time over here. I be scared. And what kinds of things happened to you and your family in Auschwitz? Tell me what life was like there? It was like hell. You could no-- no do nothing. It was like hell. And you know when you walk that street, you no come out no more. You no come out no more. You know that, that feelings you get when you see all that stuff was happening in there. And you get the feelings you no come out no more. You can believe it. You no come out no more. I don't know why I come out. All the time I say, when my-- my brothers and people, my mama die, and my father, I say, why I'm living still? I ask that. 'Jesus,' I say, 'why I living still?' I was not so good person. Why you no take me? I tell the people that, and they say, Ella, your time is not here yet. They got something planned for you. I say, what? I want to know that. 'No,' that what people tell me, in that older's home. It's just old people. Sometime you sit there, you know, just wait for the-- that you die. And that's really bad. So this was what's happened. So while you were in Auschwitz, you were with your family. Before your father was taken away, what kind of work did he do besides the ovens? Did he do other kind of work? Yeah, working on the street. Doing what? Making the street that the-- that the people can walk by. Just fix a street. A whole lot of Gypsy did that. And did your father do anything else? Did he work in the kitchen at all? No, he was in the canteen. You know what canteen is? Mm-hmm. The people buying stuff in there. And there my daddy was working in there. In Auschwitz? Yeah. We call it canteen. You can buy sauerkraut, mustard, stuff like that when you had some money left-- when they no find your money and take it away from you. Why they take that money and stuff, gold and stuff, they took it from dead people what they pull out of the stove. They-- they had gold teeth. They pull it out. They break the teeth out and get the gold out. That what Gypsy did too. My daddy did have to do it too. Did your daddy do any cooking for the Nazis at all? No. No, he ain't a cook. And you said he entertained. Yeah, he did. He was part of the band. Band, yeah. Uh-huh. What were the food rations like? Bad. They no had no food. They give you some from some, where the cows eat, they make a soup out. And they give you that to eat. And did you do anything about that while you were there? Yeah, I steal like a rat. What kinds of things? I steal bread. I steal pots. If you no had a pot, you could no get no food. So I steal that and-- and give it to somebody. And they give me a piece of bread for, that they can get a ration. And when you no had no pot, you no can get your ration not. You know, I went out all the time, by the Polish people, step in their pots while they was cooking. And then I pick them up and run. I did that. I, all the time, was somewhere where I no supposed to be. Did you ever get caught? Yes. While I steal the potatoes. And what happened? Everybody went there and got the potatoes. I was the last one. Went over there and I got caught. And I had about 12 potatoes in-- in my legs. And then, while-- while I was in there, somebody got me. So I put a-- I said-- I saw he had the potatoes out. So I got it out with the And then I get me some like cow the tail from the-- from that cow. And this was standing in the water in there, the salt water. And I have to counted how many potatoes I had. I had 12 potatoes. I got 12 times, beat up. And then asked me if I want them. I said yes, for my sister. She dying. She's hungry. And then I got 12 more. Well, I went home. I even could walk no more, or to lay on my back. I could-- I lay only on my stomach. All my behind was open, where-- where they hit me. And then-- and then I had them raw potatoes, uncook. Then we have to see how we cook it. Then they shoot you beside the head. Make sure you no can cook them. So this-- this-- this is a whole lot. A whole lot of suffering for something where you no can get. I just hope that people heard that story, that they change their mind, and do nobody harm. That we-- I wish, while all the time that I had a wish, let people know what's going on in the world. And I no knowledge, no promise. Just do your thing. Tell me about the accommodations where you slept. How many people were in this place? We-- we had two beds. My whole family sleep in them two beds. No, no-- no-- no mattress, nothing. You sleeping just in-- in the-- on the floor. And what kind of clothing did you have at this time? I had clothing was blue and-- blue and white-- the concentration camp clothes. They give you a dress, and this is it. And a pair of shoes. And then in the nighttime, sometime they entered that-- that building and get the people out and gas them. And when you got to give your shoes away, you know you're going to get gassed the next day. So they do that all the time. And what were the sanitary conditions like, where you went to the bathroom, cleaned up? Oh this was bad. This was really bad. When you go in the toilet in there, like, I was a little girl. I rocked the whole night that I no have to go out there. Then, when I went out there, then you see all them dead people laying up out there. All kind of funny faces. Like-- and eyes hanging out and stuff like that. And all skinny. Just the bones and the skin. And every time I went-- went out, I was thinking then people run behind me. Then I jump in a pit in there. I don't know who was laying down there. Sometime I wake up, they said to my mama, pick up your girl. She sleep there. And I was laying by a dead people. That's what I-- what I did. But I was scared. And then the next hole was I jump in there. And just laying in there with a dead person. And I was scared. That's what you do. And how did you clean up? Did you have a place to wash up? Yeah. Wash, a washing, there was left and right, some cold water. You had no soap. You had nothing. All what the people did, get some sand and rub that with the-- they wash you like you got a piece of soap. And did something happen to any members of your family there? Like your brother? What happened there? Not my brother. My sister was that. My sister, she was so pretty. And every time we send her to get the ration. And then she came back. The ration was on top of her head, top of her clothes. And we children all was hungry. We tooking the finger and did like that, and lick it up. Why was it all over her clothes? Why they no like her. She was too pretty. So I don't know. We no had no ration when she went there. And then she came back and we got mad, we children. Every time we send you, we get nothing. It's very bad if people no like you. What did they do to her? They cut her hair off, make her look ugly, all that. How did they make her look ugly? They cut all of her hair, bald headed. And-- and beat her up. Burn her. Burn her? Yeah, burn her with that hot soup. And that-- that-- that thing where you pull, take it out. They put it on top of her head and face. And we children didn't know nothing better. We licked that stuff up, the food, and eat it. And what happened to your brother in Auschwitz? My brother, nothing happened. He just there. He, all the time, help me steal, my brother. What about your little brother? Oh, my little brother. This was like that. He was sick. And every night the people come in and get-- put the chocolate milk down. And-- and that man came in with him's little pocketbook and put some poison in there. And my mama said to us children, you can drink water. And let that chocolate milk for your sick brother. So we listen to on the mother. What she said is gold. So I went-- we went there. Next day the boy was dead. And a whole lot of children more. So we got to be thankful that I live because of that. A whole lot of children dies at night, while, while the chocolate milk was poisoned. Yeah, this was my little brother, Florian. And what happened with your mother after she saw that? Well, she supposed to carry the boy down there. See, the other children was dead. She could not do it. She was sick then. She was really sick. She could not believe it, this happened then. And then later that man come all the time, buying me something. Then my mama no let him to eat no more. And we-- we children got all mad. So that's what. And did you go to school at all while you were there? No. I never see a pencil or a piece of paper. Did you have any oral education? Did anybody talk to you? No. The-- the-- the-- the nuns, yeah. What did they tell you? The nuns say that the war will be finished pretty soon. And we ask about that fire, that smell. And she say, look. Look at that. That smoke goes straight to Jesus up there. They all be angels. That what they teach us. They teach us out of the Bible. And we children, people, we no know that. They make us mad. They talk like that. Me look at what-- what them, they get out. And they talk about stuff like that-- everybody got their own belief, you know-- how them Nazi was 'good people.' They went outside. They could go outside and make communist job came back in. This was hard. Do you know what it was in there? And they still had to come back. Did you speak German in the camp? Or did you speak Romani? We speak Romani. And we were able to communicate with anybody outside of your camp? No. Did you talk to any of the Jewish prisoners or anything like this? Sometime we speak. You know, when they was coming by you. Like we staying three days outside. OK, we're going to stop the tape right here. OK.