today is july 13, 1998. we're interviewing ella davis. name it birth was vintage. interviewer sheila rodin novak, we're conducting the interview in columbia, south carolina, usa, and it's been conducted in english. my name is sheila rodin novak. we're interviewing ella davis in columbia, south carolina, and july 13, 1998. ella, would you please tell us your name and spell it for us? tell us your name. ella davis. gebol, vidi. and have you ever been known by any other names? no. and what is your birth date? say in the 9th, 34. and your current age is what? how old are you now? 64. and what is the city and the country of your birth? stuttgart, germany. ella, tell us a little bit about what kind of a child you were. how was a little girl? a stuttled going school and then you stopped me? what are some of your best memories as a child? well, i was with my mother and my father in calso. my father was in the army. this was my own, my sister brought about me. what is your father's name? i bring vidi and your mother's name. sophie, we are fulfilled. and do you know how your parents met? no, i don't know that. how many sisters and brothers did you have? i got nine. i just got born born now. and can you tell me all of their names? yes. the name was popla. and then i came. and then... ma'viyya, gizala, kunu, and florian. and what kind of work did your parents do when you were growing up? my wife, she was five and she was seven. and did you work? yes, i did too. you get teach, and you did it. and what kind of work did you do? i felt a good job for a dog for a dog. and what was your parents' national background? your father? my father was in the army. and the german army. and was he german? yes. and what religion was your father? captain nick. and what about your mother? what was her nationality? see, rash, gypsy. and what was her religion? kind of like it also. and did you have a favorite toy growing up? i had a bear. and did he go everywhere with you? yeah, i took him everywhere. what kind of things did you like to do as a little girl? play? did you have a lot of friends? no. we never had no more friends. what kind of a neighborhood did you grow up in? in a normal neighborhood, mass-nome, with their gypsies in that neighborhood? yes, it was. and was there like a tribe? or no, and you are gypsies. you got the interelos. on the ever-partica, i had children. i had children, i had children, and i had a bunch of children. we had children met each other, we stayed together all the time. please, you can't do us. and this is the same. when you get you, you look and play no more. you know, you can't go in school no more. you know, did nothing. on the two kids in the school, and you can never go back no more. you just took you and put you away. before we talk about that, i want to know a little bit more about how you grew up. okay? tell me about your grandparents. oh, do you, do you want to nice? would these your father's parents? yeah, my mother's parents. what were your grandparents' names? my father-in-law? no, their parents. oh, i didn't know that. you don't know your grandfather's name? no, the power was him on all of my dad's father-in-law. and what about your mother's? will he? i don't know my grandmother's name, you know. and did you spend much time with your grandparents? yes, i did. my mother had so many children, so me all the time went to grandma. do you have any special memories of your grandmother? did she do something special for you? yes, she did. she was in a church next to her, on a neck. snakes? snakes, yeah. so i know she did very special work. work in a church. uh-huh. were you afraid of the snakes? no, i know it was for it. now, yeah. did you see your grandmother in the circus ever? yeah, i did. i did. and what about your father's parents? what did they do? do you sell them by? just all what you did. was there a special food that your grandmother made? cookies on a bag, a day to buy, buy, on an onion cake. didn't even know the time to add my jeep back all the time. she was a very nice lady. did anybody else live with you when you were a child? my sister. other than your immediate family? no. did your family roam at all while you were growing up? what's you did? did they travel in a caravan at all? no. did you have a regular house? yeah, regular house apartment. did any of your family travel while you were growing up? no. and what language did you speak at home? ashby. chibsy. and chim. and did you learn any other languages? in the conjurizing of the yes. what language did you learn? polish. now, all the time you hang out by the polish ladies, well, they were by the kitchen work in there. all the time we get some food there. so, we was there all the time. unlike the head of food and you talk to them, you know, i learned, i learned, right? i learned. this was where you learned. double, you could go faster. stuff like that. you learned easy there. going back to your childhood, tell me how your family celebrated holidays like christmas. what was that like in your house? yes. this was okay. we get special food. what kind of food? i'm a noodle lady. i like noodles. but they ate a salad. and sour fruit. food like that. they're my mama cooked. they're special. and did you get presents? yes. yeah, we got presents. what kind of presents? a doll or a dress, a pair of shoes. we know that it's so much the plain meat. i want to do a while to give them a doll or something small. did a lot of people come over to your house for the holidays? yes. my uncles, my das. what kind of stories were passed down in your family? did you hear stories from the old? your mama didn't tell you stories. no, no, tell them stories. and do you recall any special activities that you did with your gypsy relatives? no. did you see yourself as german first or as gypsy first? i'll share them. and then later i'll trip see why i'm going to go nowhere. and what about your family? did they all consider themselves germans first? no, gypsy. and what about your father? my father went german. my love was the army. did he identify with the gypsies, your father? yeah, i talked to them. my father was a pretty good gypsy. our little bit added. i learned from my mother, only was talking then. i didn't know one, that did talk to me to gypsy. everyone hide it. and what kind of a school did you attend? in the normal school? i'm ending there. you see, cut me out to school. and what language did they speak in school? german. were there other roma and cinti students in your school? yes, barra. india. was it a mixed class? mixed class. do you remember any particular teachers? no. nobody made a special emotion. did you have any experiences being registered or in a genealogical study by the germans? no. did somebody come into your school? yes. and what happened? this is what, to believe people, they hit civilian clothes on barra vanazzis. did you go into school? make picture on the thing after the thing. fingerprint. yeah. and do you make the pictures of the nurse? then the teacher, the teacher, he takes home. this was old. he did it as a couple days. he's coming out, coming out, taking out the school. and did they do anything else, daniel? no. you know, they did nothing. these definitely did nothing. you chose one in the staff. even when we started, we go somewhere. our scared and our scared, the tell my mother that. my mama ole at a maraisa elton went in school in the n.s. why did you do that? so that was this was old. we see frequency up in the morning, four o'clock in the morning. on the other hand, the one on the old out. the divorce, we were my dad, my mama, he was three for one, first to drown to drown. then we saw the incarceration. this one brought us easy to get us. so all the chips he stopped, no more for our normal, for our house, the state. there, we went there on the head. he was the, you know, everybody was living in gypsy. the gutters. before that happened, how are your relations you and your family with the gauges? did you have relations? did you know them? no. did your father work with some? yeah, my dad was working with him. did they ever come into your home? no. and what was the name of the leader of your gypsy group? oh, ed, i had some, we came stomach, i could just eat really human by it, but ed, my mama, he demanded a hate. who, my mother, will see fun out of that hell and us all. who told anya? a chipsy man. i was thinking i can save himself, when i tell other people who was, who was rayleigh, who could be chipsy, so my mama found that out and then she, she took questions and he demanded that. it was all eddy. was this in the camp? no, it was outside. no. before the camp. yeah. the gypsies that your mother belonged to, was there, did they have a clan name or a tribe name? no, church, chupsy. was there a leader of that group, somebody that they went to for decisions? no. no. no leader of your mama's group? no. what kind of experiences do you remember of discrimination before the nazis picked you up? this was one story and what else? any other stories you remember? i was, we were sitting in the conjuration camp then, then they put all the people in the tran, in the tran. this was bad. before that, when you were still living at home, do you remember anybody doing bad things to you or to your family? no. just taking the pigeon to the thing up, don't. and yeah, do you measure your face? do you find it out? what, or do you, chupsy or the jam and whatever? do you have a look in for that? you did that? did anybody call you bad names? no, he said chupsy. is it kind of? no. and did anybody get beaten up, walking on the street or anything like that? oh yeah, the chuys people. they beat them bad up, then people. and what about your people? chupsy's too, yeah. i will not that much. i think on that, you see him from far away that they've achieved on the chupsies. do you know why not chupsies in there? do you want to clean the people out? did you ever have to wear an arm band or anything like that? no, i hate about it in the contract, i shouldn't get them. but before that, we can ask you. no, i don't have to wear it. did you have to have an identification card? something that said who you were? no, i don't think so. what about your mother? my momma brought a hate one, i don't know. you need a paper, you need a pass. you know, they do not use the police, the nots wash, the any, there's somewhere. then you have to show something that you can pass that way. did you have that kind of pass? no, but your momma did. and do you remember not being able to do anything? were you able to go to the park and play? no. you could not go there. when they pick you up, you were scared. you don't want to go there no more. you picked you up any time when they feel like, did you, any time when they feel like did you? did this happen to you? yeah. when i went to my school, what so? so you know, go there and this happened to you. you know, you was scared. i now people are scared for that stuff. but you never know what's going on in the ball. do you remember a week in 1938 when a lot of the gypsies were rounded up and their belongings were broken up and taken away and stuff? what happened then? tell me about it. you just break stuff on planet. and then we start running. it's one corner to the under corner, chest door like a dog. you run there, run there, run there. it was just like a dog to get you. that way the nazi can try to get you. and when you get you to do the same thing, you put your own jailhouse and put you somewhere. and you all the time was scared. all the time. you know, okay. my desk go around. people do take it. we put them away. do you remember saying that happened? yeah, it happened. and the morning became four o'clock in the morning chest meeting with the truck. we picked the people out of the house, put them top the truck on the roof right away. did this happen to people you knew? yeah. so my own entity did that on the event in that, in that to the polish people in the higher you call it. and like, like, oh, i don't know how you are. let me say there now. boss, now conjurizing, can this boss nothing? boss, chest, houses. we put them in there. this was the next way. oh, you go. do you take your out there and put you to the conjurizing? there was the train, get filled up. this was the next way where you go. you could not go nowhere, no more. how do you walk lucky? you got away. how have you got away? so you remember this week in 1938. do you remember seeing things broken and so on? yeah, they call that crystal light. and were the gypsies affected too? yeah, i would not that much like the jewish people. did they do it before this to the gypsies? i don't know that our days were most of the time, was for the jewish people. this was the girls night. they went in there and broke everything. they rolled the books, the good books, out of the pranam. that what you did, our gypsies was not that much. did you cut them and put you away? and this is it. did you have to report to the local police, your family? yes, you got to tell them. you got to tell them. well, you stay on the same day. how many people stay there? oh, how many you know? oh, did they ask you some more gypsies there? they say, yeah, my husband, they don't want to put them up later. so people, gypsies, we will not talk much. did you have to go to the police yourself at all? yeah, i met my mother. and what happened to you there? did you just scare you when you finish scanning you? then you let you go again. my mom took me there and we went home. our... there were so many people in there. you could not see nothing anymore. everybody was calling and crying. but they know, they know, come back and go. for you or anyone in your family ever arrested by the police, will you jail at all? no, just for when they got us. when they got us, they put us there. this was just like a house now. you go in there and stay for eight days. you still got time to put you to the conjurization camp. was your whole family put into this? yeah. so tell me what happened. how did they get your family together? what happened? ellen, the mowing for a clock. then nazi came on nakandador. tell them they want the chipsi room with a child. my dad is saying, no. my dad is saying, i work. i'm working for the people. i mean, the army, i'm fighting for the... for the contrary. and i don't give nobody out. then the curtains still out. so after that, my daddy may have to go to my dad, hit the picture down and drop it on the floor. the picture of the hitler. on step on it, broke it. my dad is saying, my asshole did it. when i fight for the contrary. on that do stuff like that. so i can break the picture with him feet. then we went with the truck and jailhouse in khalsa room. on my momma, my brothers and sisters, we were saying one jailhouse in there. my father was in a under room. on my momma, before my father left the house, a haitim's gun with him. and then we were able to meet him, as i said, my children were going nowhere. at right, shoot us in the jailhouse. my momma went in the knees and said, not the word. not the word, i'll be leave it alone. then my daddy was crying. i'm putting his gun away again. then we went with the back and it's a jailhouse. my daddy, it was in strong. my momma was heavy, i let him go back, change me all died, and the jailhouse in there. and i wanted to let him go in the jailhouse. and the conjuration came by daddy. by all of them, say, i'm in the army and fight for the land. only i did do stuff to my family. so this was all. ok, we're going to stop the tape right here.