a survey we are with the survivor julia baker lintini. i am leanne hurst. we are in hemit, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. it is november 12th, it is november 12th, 1995. i am with survivor julia baker lintini. i am leanne hurst. we are in hemit, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. would you please tell us your name and spell it? my name is julia lintini. could you spell it for us? i was valentini. julia j. u. l. i.a. lintini, ellie n. t. i. n. i. and where were you born? i was born in iceland, germany. could you spell that for us, please? yes. it is e. e. e. i. s. s. e. r. n. and where were you born, please? i was born april 15, 1926. and did you grow up in iceland? i did not grow up in iceland. i grew up in beadencoz, germany. i lived there with my family. born for the summertime, and we were out there with dragons. and i was born out there in the hospital somewhere in iceland. my brother, i am a gypsy. my family was gypsy. we traveled around in the summertime or in germany, as we were children. my whole family. and my mother had this year and i is next year in wudesbach. every 14, 15 months mild and had 14, 15 children, and 7 girls. and i was born in iceland somewhere in the hospital there. and tell me, you were born in the summertime. what was summertime like? what was the gypsy girl? it was a beautiful, the best time. in the morning, you get up with the birds. at night you sleep with the stars and the moon. my father was a 100-smanage. we called it in german. he was 100-smanage. he was a basket weaver. he was a horse, a trader also. and that's what he used to do in the summertime. we lived there in april, may, sometimes. all the pens had weather words. and we got back when the frost came. and he made all his money in his living in the summer out there. then when we got home, because he had horses, he continued his horse trading business there. we had a barn. my other house right across the street was the barn. and there we had horses. pics for our own people, but they're off. and for the full life we had to chill as children. this was a life we loved. this is a life we knew. and of course we did go to school in the summer. i need to say this, that we did go to the schools in all different parts, wherever we were. what town? say it, wherever. if it was for three days, it was for two days. we went to school. we had a book. and they had to be signed by the principals in each particular town. and it just had to all harmonized together. we were missing any school, because this is only where my parents could take it. my parents could take us out of school. and that's how we were raised. and then we had our steady schooling in the fall, where we got home, where we were at home, home of speeding clubs. and there we are, out of the house of steady home. my dad had bought us home before even was born there. and i think they had four or five children when they bought that house. and we just grew up in that house. when i left germany, i went to the united states, that elder house was there. my family is still in there. it's a day, still a little bigger house, because one of my nephews bought the place. so going back to the gypsy life, it was a wonderful life. i can't say anything else about it. it's even alive, it's hard to explain. you really have to live that type of a life. a little artistic. my dad was in a weaving business, making baskets, finding stuff for a nature. and my mother had her children. and we were taking care of each other, but it was a good life. we had lots of love. that's one thing i have to say. lots of children, maybe not too much with the clothes and the situation. but we had a lot. eight all the time. with a new food. plenty of food. all the german foods that come from the lot. the taste is so super. the getgovetched of all the new music, the situation. it's a good life. and i'd have benefit from that short life that i have with my family. my childhood. tell me what a summertime day was like. let's just pick a day in july. the whole day. it was a hot, this hot newment. it was a spring and the fall was night. but that's hot. german, the humidity, the age of the first thing. well, in the morning we got up and we had to go to school. did you take care of animals or anything first? no, the boys had to do that. no, the boys had to do that. but we as young girls, when we were young girls, we had to eat each other. of course. what were your choice? taking care of it a little once. the next on the meal, the next above me, not so much above me. the one on the baby. each other a chair, a children. helping the ways each other. because there were so many of them. and this is something we just did automatically. we knew what we had to do and we had done it. the boys should help with the animals. oh yeah. and later on as i got older, with we got older, we were home in the fall. and my father had the pigs in the horses, of course. and occasionally he would take some flowers in and we were just a children to care. you know, boys were at bigger and they helped with the business and the girls had to help. we had to help with washing and also had to take turns with cooking and darning and all this plenty of wash to do. there was no other man like that. today we had a wash, and a wash cushion they called it. and there was strictly two, three days on the side. just for washing the white clothes was boiled. sometimes in the sun was out. that was hung into the sun was brought back in again. we were in that. we were in that again. and that, everybody was clean, of course. it was much more work than it, but it was easier today. so, you can get up in the morning and go to school. go to school. and of course, it was an easy sometimes, you know. it's been in it. because we were used to it. it's just that we couldn't change school again and school again. we had to make friends, you know. sometimes it was easy. sometimes a little harder to make friends, you know. but then after school time we went to school. we came home and we went picked up like they do today. we had to work. sometimes we were miles away from the school. or two miles. and we just four or five of us, which is much down the school. didn't think not enough. we were in the school. we were in march. they're saying sometimes, captain trouble stopped on a spot. bloodsum, we were there. we were playing games or something was going on. and we didn't go straight home. no. i'm always mad. it was for a rich, huge man because he's waiting for certain things to be done. so we got plenty of little. i don't know how to say it. but we had plenty of... she had a little stick. a little wooden stick. she came out once and a while. that's the way we were by where we were. she was a little punishment. did she ever use the stick on you? she sure did. what did you do? you know what? it was not so much the stick. my mother was left handed. and when my mother got gone, everyone, either she'll call julia. before she got to me, betty, susie, lena, i sure was whoever she called all 14 of them. she'll she got that 15. one, you know. and that's so it was. my mom, i didn't do it. but that left hand shift on thematically everywhere. oh, well, i'm sorry. you have to sit there. so there it was. there's too many of them. and we knew that. so we loved them. my mom was wondering about that too. they were wonderful parents. but whatever they'd known for, but toward us, toward us beautiful things that most of our love. it's never went away. i think we love each other now more. but we got older and i'm going to pass away. it's just you can't buy that in the truck stores. you can't get it anywhere. it is something you have from home. from as a child. and that's the way it was. need one of my eyes. a little bit. can i do that? okay. how did you travel? everything my wagons, horses, all we had bikes. we're at the, i remember my sister, matilda, who died now, she was, she was working and doing some work for some. it was a big, big gradient. they had cows and animals. and she had a job there. and the fields too mean wound grass and everything. and those days they didn't have all this machinery stuff. they had those senses. i don't know what they call that. here in america, we cut the grass with, you know, like said, we call it a sense. it's like a hand stick around it and a size. it's like a sense. okay. what they call it. and that sense went in her leg and she cut her angle on that. so she had to be hospitalized and it took it to mom work. 33 kilometers from beaten cup. and we used to go visit her on the bikes. 33 miles of killing me. that's gone and 33 kilometers. there's no problem at all. there's days. that's how we, that's all we knew. there's no fancy buses and fancy days and that. but it was, we done this. you know, as you said today, 33 miles, killing me, that's gone and 36 kilometers. and a bike, you know what i mean? it was a daily routine, really. and i don't know how i got the talk about that. they're telling me about the wagons and the bikes. oh, so there was no, you know, if the wagon, my dad was, sometimes my dad was hired for doing the field work. like plowing their fields because we had the horses and the equipment. so my dad did that kind of work also. now, and of course, the bigger girls or the boys was around had to help drive the horses or he loaded up the wagons. and you know, 13, 12, no matter what age you were, if you were capable of doing this. and we wanted to do all this. this was something because we were always together. we took our lunches, we had the fish stick mums and fish stick mid-dars, and we had the meat and eggs and then we had the afternoon, coffee and then again six, seven, like they're on board. so they were all looking forward to things and we're saying, what's nice? it's just, we don't have all those problems. my own children have to date. i tell them those little things. this is just unbelievable. and we were happy with that. we loved it. wonderful family. and you slept under the stars in the summertime? on the stars, sometimes we go to bed. it was amazing. let's say me. me first, my dad sometimes left early and if we could work up in the morning, it was a light, plug it of snow. light snow out there. it's only less for days, so because it was already late in the season. but it happened. but there was a few times that we got up in the, went to sleep in the stars and woke up with a little white snow there. and the thing, and the slides had to go on and do the went on. we just put the heavier jackets on and did i think whatever we had to do? how far was your travel in the given summer? we drove from germany. you brought me here. i know germany. i'm pretty sure. from the grens, it's a grens. it was about six hours, one way or six hours, although those days with the wagons, we probably traveled about 20, 30 kilometers sometimes. not always. that's a long thing with horses and wankings and the drive. but my dad used it, especially in the summer when it was too warm for the horses. then we left early early in the morning or late at night. and we had the little stalom, but they called it hangin' on there for lights. you know what i mean? there was no street lights on those sight streets like that. but sometimes we drove late at night or very early in the morning, but four o'clock. i mean, you didn't have to worry about traffic. there was no cars going. everybody was with the horses. i can see them. but the weather condition had a lot to do with the traffic. it was a lot to do with the traveling plants too. he kind of knew for his three days of sometimes the week, sometimes two weeks on the summer, those parking spots were required. sometimes only three days or two days, all depends how the business was. let me hear the living, of course. and this is a sense, it's unbelievable, but it's a gorgeous life. beautiful, happy, happy, happy life. i had to do it all over again. i would do it even now, my 70 years old, and i would do it. what about the town life? did a full time? as you've seen some of the pictures, i should. it's a small town. that's not that small anymore now. but it was where i think they were nine hundred or twelve hundred i'd worn us at that particular time. it's cool to be a big city now. but everybody knew everybody. the schools, wonderful teachers, and everybody admired our lives. they always said, oh, i wish i could. and many times, we did take some of the neighbors with the summer. they said, you know, mrs. mito, mrs. johnson, the edward v. was kids and my mother, and they said, oh yeah, well, you only want to go with just some, you got enough of your own, but always one of them came along. they had fed 14, she fed 15 or 18, many times neighbors had mrs. mito. how can you? you got a total shelf for yourself, you know. i know you cook for 12 or 15, you cook for 18. so we always had somebody eating there. and i'm the same way. you come in my house today. there's always enough food for a couple extra people. did they ever take one of your best friends with you? always. school friends. well, we still, i have two of my girlfriends. we just, we had our 58 golden for confirmation. they go for the 50 years, the golden confirmation, and we graduated from school. and the three of them still will be used to house, rots around, and those three girls are those two in myself. we're so wrong. what are their names? emma is one, or nearly, is the other one. last names. emma called it on emma ellie crave. wonderful. we were real, little, actually dropping, i guess. everyone little, he was inclined to freeze worse than the boys. and then you know the boys, he's going to fight and wear us, want to make this, but we always stuck together the three of us. so emma grew up, and the confirmation together, and the church together. and at the time we had some in the winter time, and we were home. so i think we were about, if you really count the months when we were out for me, till the first frostness, obviously in the beginning of october, we were home. and then from october, until may again, this is school. steady schooling, okay? and then the summer, of course. but we did okay. so school was year round in germany? all year round. oh yeah. they get run, if it's fine, not in christmas. they get off a few, we got think a few days. and there's some kind of summer vacation also. and then of course we didn't have to go to school. that was, we had looked forward to that too. and we didn't have to go on the go-by-war, you know, maybe a while there somewhere. but we were looking for that too. i think, two or three weeks, i think we had a off, you know what i mean, this is for the school. but, i'm curious, how do 15 children fit in one wagon? yeah, i want you to know some. we had that wagon, like i showed you, i don't know what it was, just one other wagon. we remember that wagon was six to seven feet long. it's almost like a circus wagon, if you really look at it. but it wasn't. this was special. my dad had a wagon made every year, every year knew wagon because at the end of the business, the end of the way he was, on the end of the season, the end of august, they called it arnold's, and they had a big, like a fair there. and all the gypsies, all the handle hundreds, men i came there with their animals, with their business, their house, and their horses, and their sheep. and that's where all the business was done. and where is the business? it was with arnold's. it's a town? it's a town in arnold's. and it's very known for that, like, pomona here for the fair. these are all and was known for those hundreds, men are with the animal kingdom. and of course, they had them rights and this and that, music and beards, whatever they had there. but this was every year. and when my dad pulled up, they were all waiting already, their handlesmen are mostly the dark. they said, like, gypsiness, like gypsiness to different types, and they always waited for my dad because they knew he was coming in with a new wagon. and there was a handle. there was a handle with money made. my mother always hated that. they go to that location there because she had to stop back and took a diff to get an old wagon. and my dad sold the wagon, the new wagon, maybe a couple of horses, where did any way? made all this business there. and my dad used to have him custom made. custom made, like i said, they were seven, six, made, six, made, seven, made. and i think they're four, made, right. now, i remember the, i was about just before we went into the camp. i remember we had less few years. he had them, the walmart, i would, carving, fancy carving. and on the edge, he had like lions carved and four on each edge of the wagon. the lions carved. and the windows, he had etched glass on them, like a trumpeter from taking some famous person with the, in the inside, it was not real, beautiful tool. they had double bits in the bag. now, in the bigger children, they had boys. when they got bigger, we had a little, i'm hanging, we called it, a little dog got a little trailer with a tent type over, but it was also custom made. it was only for sleeping. and there was also made double. for the girls, on the big girls on top, separately there was a floor between and the boys on the bottom. it was all custom made. so, then when we had got old there, and we were traveling, like they had in my mom in the front there, like you could see there, we were sat in the back there between, it was like a connection. there was a connection there between the wagon and that trailer, that little trailer there was not that little. and we used to sit there and used to sing all the way harmony from the first to the second, the four groups, four sisters, about to say, i'm aged there. we used to sing good harmony together. that my dad used to say, sometimes commanded if you get the girl and what his friends and i want you to listen to my daughter. i said, i feel you were sitting there. and we had to sing there. i'm a nice one, german song, i'll tell another, you know what i mean? and this is those little excitement what i told you about. growing up with those type of wonderful, wonderful things, wonderful, wonderful things. and you only have those lifetimes once and you don't ever get that chance again. that's why i said you should enjoy all your growth, all your growing up and all my children. because by so fast. what language did you speak in your family? we speak german, of course. but we also speak if you read in with the other people, they speak that's like a wrongness language. and that we speak. then we spoke that they all folks, we didn't speak english, a german, they spoke with the, that wrongness. so we're kind of, like, you know, if you're tired and distant and you're much of speaks of the title and you speak english, of course. you don't ever speak it with the mother, but you do know the language somehow you learn the family parent. and then somebody comes to you home and you do not speak. because they don't speak english, so you have to kind of use, so this is how we learned the and the look there. but i mean, between us was the german. and of course, if i wanted to talk about something, like a few girls wanted to talk about something, we talked about this. i do it today with my children. yeah. so today when we are somewhere, you can't even speak german because a lot of people speak german here. so i used the wrongness, which my kids don't, but they do. even my friends, and they're 24, he's doing real good with it. most of your friends are the gypsies who were they ethnic germans. no. we had some of the girls who were met out there in the gypsies, of course. we had some there, and so that was for short times. the, the, the, the, the, the long-lasting, the, the language influence was both ways anyway, but with steadiness, when we were at home to be in love. and then of course, there were six months where we were, or then, went to this school, we went to the place, we went to, just gone for work sunday mornings. we take a couple of kids along, and we worked up in the hill. i know we had a dog. we had a dog whose name was charles, my dad was my oldest brother's dog. my dad had bought it for him, and that dog was 17 years old, and he got blind. i have so, of course, a dog grew up, but that's, we are, most of us grew up with that dog. some of them weren't even one yet, but halfway through like my, myself, we were raised with that dog. so he was 17 years old, he was blind. and, had to be put away by that set, and i'll do that anymore. so of course, you could imagine what was going on, my oldest brother, henry, she got sick over it. he was 17, and of course, he was a dog, but he hired a forest, and he shot him, and then we buried him out up on the hill, on the wood, on the pine tree, and this was, got to be known to all the children. there was a bigger, a bigger, a little child, buried there, everybody brought little flowers, and little crosses, and that tree was all carved with different names, and spent a few years, for years, we grew up with that, that hill up there, and it was kind of warm. in my mother's son, in my morning's, was after church, we had to go to church, and then she was cooking early church, we had to go, they were cooking, my mother, my dad, my dad loved the cook. from there was, she see how far. and she says, julia, nemma, tharna, kine, dish, restful, they fell little ones there, one or two or three, and taken nice little work, bring jobs on flowers up there, just to give her the first four, one, he little kids for a while, and that's the way it was. and all the friends too, now, let's take a walk up the trail, use some to do, and on the way up there, we talked to where you're going, nice. tell me, you went to church on sundays. yeah. what we raised. i was my mom, my mom was catholic, my father was protestant, and somehow they decided to raise us a part of some lutheran. so my mother never went to the lutheran church. my mother kept her religion. she didn't go to catholic church either, but she had her little statues, she did her little beliefs, but she did not go to church with us. my dad, every sunday, that's one thing he did, he took us to church. and boy, if we weren't there, one, one, one, one, that was one thing. he woke up there, and we were at all, thought, thought shoes and that, and anyway, we did go to church. and then as go on to school, you have to go to catechism, we did that, and of course when you're 13, 14, you've got to come from asian. you finish when you're in school. and then you have to go into some household things, from the fact just before i went to, we got arrested, i had just started my household year. i was, but, 15, and i started. i was living, he kept me for the, he had a job, the war was already starting at that time, and he was working for the city there, pulling wood with the wagon, cutting wood for the city. and, so he kept the as long as he could, but that was a must, you had to go for that year, that particular time. the government required this? they were so requirement, yes, that you did go, something just here. just the girls. just the girls. and of course boys automatically went into a layer, like a layering, they went into, you know, girls didn't go into much for the, the learning at trade at that time, that was house, getting the housewife, and learning how to cook and how to clean the anatomy. that's, that's the situation. so, house was very fun. i know my sister, in this one particular household, was a big gas station, they ordered, it was a husband while older folks, and, with german people, and they had a, a mother gas, they had a big dirty room home there, they did a lot of entertaining, and my older sister, matilda died in the camp. she worked there for a year. the, my sister, she worked there for a year, and was my turn out to go, and it was, first they told me all the nice things, how i was going on, that's a, then i've noticed later on that old man, it looked like the old man at the mountains, i have a picture, she looked just like that, and she was pretty old, herself. we need to stop here, for the tape. thank you. thank you.