is that the time you would... i'm leanne herpst. we are in hemet, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. it is november 12, 1995. i am with survivor julia baker lentini. i am leanne herpst. we are in hemet, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. would you please tell us your name and spell it? my name is julia lentini. could you spell it for us? i would spell lentini. julia, g-u-l-i-a, lentini, l-e-n-t-i-n-i. and where were you born? i was born in eisen, germany. could you spell that for us, please? e, capital e-i-s-s-e-r-n. and when were you born, please? i was born april 15, 1926. and did you grow up in eisen? i did not grow up in eisen. i grew up in biedenkopf, germany. i lived there with my family. i was born for the summertime and we were out there with wagons. and i was born out there in a hospital somewhere in eisen. i am a gypsy. my family was gypsy. we traveled around in the summertime over in germany as we were children, my whole family. and my mother had this year in eisen, next year in wüldesbach. every 14, 15 months my alden had 14, 15 children, 8 boys and 7 girls. and i was born in eisen, somewhere in the hospital there. tell me, you were born in the summertime. what was summertime like as a gypsy girl? as a gypsy girl? it was a beautiful, the best time. in the morning you get up with the birds. at night you sleep with the stars and the moon. my parents, my father was a handelsmann, as we called it in germany. he was a handelsmann. he's a basket weaver. he was a horse trader also. and that's what he used to do in the summertime. we'd leave there in april, may sometimes, all depends how the weather was. and we got back when the frost came and he made all his money in his living in the summer out there. then when we got home, of course he had horses, he continued his horse trading business there. we had a barn, my alden house right across the street was the barn and there we had horses, pigs for our own being, for our own bedav. and it was a wonderful life. we had children. this was a life we loved. this is a life we knew. and of course we did go to school in the summer and neither would i say this, that we did go to the schools in all different parts, wherever we were, what town, city, wherever. if it was for three days, if it was for two days, we went to school, we had a book and it had to be signed by the principals in each particular town and it just had to all harmonize together that we weren't missing any school because that's the only way my parents could take us out of school. and that's how we were raised. and then we had our steady schooling in the fall when we got home. where was home? home was beedenkopf. and there we are, alden house, a steady home. my dad had brought us home before i even was born there. and i think they had four or five children when they bought that house and we just grew up in that house. when i left germany, i went into the united states, that alden house was there. my family is still in there. today it's still a little bigger house because one of my nephews bought the place. so going back to the gypsy life, it was a wonderful life. i mean i can't say anything else about it. even in life it's hard to explain. you really have to live that type of life. a little artistic. my dad was in the weaving business, making baskets, fine stuff, furniture. and my mother had her children and we were taking care of each other. but it was a good life. we had lots of love. that's one thing i have to say. lots of children, maybe not too much with the clothes and the situation, but we had a lot. ate all the time. plenty of food. plenty of food. all the german foods, they cut the foods a lot and the potatoes and soup and the vegetables, you know, they can be used in the sausage. it was a good life. and i have benefit from that short life that i had with my family, my childhood. tell me what a summertime day was like. let's just pick a day in july. day in july? what would it be like? it was hot and humid. it wasn't too good. spring and the fall was nice. but that's hot. the humidity there is the worst thing. in the morning we got up and we had to go to school. did you take care of animals or anything first? the boys had to do that. no, the boys had to do that. but we as young girls, when we were young girls, we had our children, of course. what were your children? taking care of the little ones. the next under me or the next above me. not so much above me, the one under me. we each had a chair raising children. helping to raise each other. because there were so many of them. and this is something we assisted automatically. we knew what we had to do. the boys should help the animals. oh yeah. and later on, as i got older, as we got older, we were home in the fall. and my father had the pigs and the horses, of course. and occasionally he would take some cows. and just the children took care of them. boys got bigger and they helped with the business. and the girls had to help. we had to help with washing. and we also had to take turns with cooking and darning. you know, there was plenty of wash to do. there was no automatics. like, well, today was all, we had a wash, an avashkish, they call it. and there was strictly two, three days on the side just for washing. the white clothes were spoiled. sometimes when the sun was out, that was hung into the sun, was brought back in again. we didn't have to rinse it again. and everything was clean, of course. it was much more work than what's easier today. so you'd get up in the morning and go to school? go to school. and of course, it wasn't easy sometimes, you know. because we were used to it. it's just that when you come from a strange school again and school again, we had to make friends, you know. sometimes it was easy. sometimes it was a little harder to make friends, you know. but then after school time, we had to go and we came home and we weren't picked up like they do today. we had to walk. sometimes we were a mile away from the school or two miles. and we just, four or five of us just marched down to the school, didn't think, not enough. we were at the school, we were marched back, sang, sometimes got in trouble, stopped on the sport, lots of them were playing games or something was going on. and we didn't go straight home. my mother was mad. she was worried. she was mad because she was waiting for certain things to be done. so then we got plenty of little, i don't know how to say it, but we had plenty of, she had a little stick, a little wooden stick. that came out once in a while. that's the way we were, was a little punishment. did she ever use the stick on you? she sure did. what did you do? well, you know, it was not so much the stick. my mother was left-handed. and when my mother got gone, she'll call julia before she got to me, betty, susie, lena, george, whoever, she called all 14 of them until she got that 15 one, you know. and that's the way it was. i said, mom, i didn't do it. but that left hand just went automatically everywhere. and that's the way it was, you know. oh, well, i'm sorry. well, you happened to sit there. so there it was, you know. it was too many of them, you know. and we knew that. but we loved our mom. my mom was wondering about that, too. they were wonderful parents with whatever they'd done, but taught us beautiful things. most of our love. it never went away. i think we love each other now more. we got older and some of them passed away. it's just you can't buy that in the drugstores. you can't get it anywhere. it's something you have from home, from as a child. and that's the way it was. i need to open my eyes a little bit. can i do that? okay. how did you travel? everything. my wagons, horses. all we had bikes. we had, i remember my sister matilda who died in auschwitz. she was working and doing some work for some, it was a big bakery there and they had cows and animals. and she had a job there. and out in the fields too, mowing the grass and everything. in those days they didn't have all this machinery stuff. they had those sensors, you know, i don't know what they called that here in america. cut the grass with, you know, like a sensor. we called it a sensor. it was like a hand stick on it. a scythe? it's like a sensor. okay. what they called it. and that sensor went in her leg and she cut her ankle on that. so she had to be hospitalized and took it to marburg, 33 kilometers from bienkopf. and we used to go visit her on the bikes, 33 kilometers gone and 3d 3 kilometers. there was no problem at all those days. that's how we, that's all we knew. no fancy buses and fancy this and that. and it was, we had done this. you know, she said today 33 kilometers gone and 36 kilometers on a bike. you know what i mean? it was a daily routine really. and i don't know how i got to talk about that. they're telling me about the wagons and the bikes. so there was no, you know, if the wagon, my dad was, sometimes my dad was hired for doing the field work. like plowing their fields because we had the horses and the equipment. so my dad did that kind of work also. now of course the bigger girls or the boys was around, had to help. drive the horses or he loaded up the wagons and you know 13, 12, no matter what age you were if you were capable of doing this thing. and we wanted to do all this. this was something because we were always together. we took our lunches with us, the frühstigmohrens and frühstigmittas and we had a, in the afternoon, cafe and then again six, seven o'clock we had our arm pulled. so we were all looking forward to this thing. and it was nice. it was just, we don't have all those problems what my own children have today. you know, i tell them those little things, this is just unbelievable. and we were happy with that. we loved it. we had a wonderful family. and you slept under the stars in the summertime? under the stars. sometimes we go to bed, it was may, let's say may. may 1st my dad sometimes left early and that was if we woke up in the morning, it was a light blanket of snow, light snow out there. it was only last for a day or so because it was already late in the season. but it happened, it was a few times that we got up and went to sleep in the stars and woke up in the little white snow there on the thing. and life had to go on and it went on. we just put the heavier jackets on and did our thing, whatever we had to do. how far would you travel in a given summer? we travel from, you know, germany, you probably, everybody knows germany, i'm pretty sure, from grenze to grenze, what was it, about six hours, one way or six hours. although those days with the wagons we'd probably travel about 20, 30 kilometers sometimes, not always. that's a long thing with horses and wagons to travel. but my dad used to, especially in the summer when it was too warm for the horses, then we left early, early in the morning or later at night. and we had the little stalampend, they called it, hanging on there for lights, you know what i mean? there was no street lights on those side streets like that. but sometimes we drove late at night or very early in the morning, about four o'clock. and i mean, you didn't have to worry about traffic, there was no cars going, everybody was with the horses and wagons, you know. but the weather condition had a lot to do with the traveling plans too. so he kind of knew, we were three days, sometimes a week, sometimes two weeks on the front of those parking spots where we would park. sometimes only three days or two days, all depends how the business was. the make a living of course, you know. and it sounds unbelievable, but it's a gorgeous life. beautiful, happy, happy, happy life. if i had to do it all over again, i would do it even now, my 70 years old, i would do it. what about the town life? it's a beautiful town, as you've seen some of the pictures i showed you, it's a small town. it's not that small anymore now, but it was, i think there were 900 or 1200 eindhoornas at that particular time. it's going to be a big city now. but everybody knew everybody, the schools, you know, wonderful teachers, and everybody admired our lives. they always said, oh, i wish i could. and many times, we did take some from the neighbors for the summer. you know, mrs. schmidt or mrs. johnson, or whoever it was, my mother, and say, oh yeah, ellie wants to go with you, so you got enough of your own. but always one of them came along. my mother had fed 14, she fed 15 or 18. many times the neighbors said, mrs. becker, how can you? you got a whole stall for yourself, you know. you cook for 12 or 15, you cook for 18. so we always had somebody eating there. and i'm the same way, you come in my house today, there's always enough food for a couple extra people. did they ever take one of your best friends with you? always school friends. i have two of my girlfriends. we just had our 50th golden confirmation, for the 50 years, the golden confirmation and we graduated from school and there's three of them still, we used to house rosarano and those three girls, those two and myself, we're still around. what are their names? emma is one, and ellie is the other one. last names? emma colvin and emma ellie craver. wonderful people, real little actual shop makers, very little. we climbed trees worse than the boys, and then you know the boys, he's kind of fighting with us, want to make this and that, but we always stuck together, the three of us. so we grew up with the confirmation together and the church together. in the time we had, in the winter time when we were home, so i think we were about, if you really count the months when we were out from may till the first frost, it was always in the beginning of october. we were home. and then from october on till may again, it was the school, steady schooling, okay, and then the summer of course, but we did okay. so school was year round in germany? all year round, oh yeah, they get, why not, christmas, they get off a few, a week i think, a few days, and there is some kind of a summer vacation also, and then of course we didn't have to go to school, that was, we looked forward to that too, and we didn't have to go on the, oh we were, you know, and we were out there somewhere, but we were looking for that too. it was about two or three weeks i think we had off, you know, i mean, this was the school, but. tell me, i'm curious, how did fifteen children fit in one wagon? yeah, i want you to know something, we had that wagon, like i showed you in one of the pictures, one in america, but remember that wagon was six to seven feet long. it's almost like a circus wagon if you really look at it, but it wasn't. this was special, my dad had a wagon made every year, every year new wagon, because it being a handler, a business handler the way he was, and the end of the season, right, in august, end of august, they called it arnold's, and they had a big, like a fair there, and all the gypsies, all the handle, handle men came there with the animals, with the, this and the cows and the horses and the sheep, and that's where all the business was done. and where was this? it was with arnoldson. is that a town? it's a town on arnoldson, yeah, and it's very known for that, like pomona here for the fair, this arnoldson was known for this, to those handlemen with the, at the animal kingdom, and of course they had then rides and this and that, and music and beards, whatever they had there, you know what i mean, but this was every year. and when my dad pulled up, they were all waiting already, the handlemen are mostly the dark, there's a black gypsy and there's a light gypsy, there's two different types, and always waited for my dad because they knew he was coming in with a new wagon, and there was handle, there was handle, it was money made, my mother always hated that, to go to that location there because she had to stop packing, took a gift, got an old wagon, and my dad sold the wagon, the new wagon, or maybe a couple of horses with it, or, anyway, made all his business there, and my dad used to have them custom made, custom made, like i tell you, they were seven meter, six meter, seven meter, and i think they're four meter wide, now i remember the, that was about just before we went into the camp, i remember we had, the last few years, he had them, they were all made out of wood, carving, fancy carving, and on the edge he had like lions carved, on four, on each edge of the wagon, the lion's calf, and the windows, he had etched glass on them, like a trumpeter from sagging some famous person with, and the inside was unreal, beautiful too, they had double beds in the back, now, when the bigger children, the boys, when they got bigger, we had a little unhinger, we called it, a little ducat, a little trailer, with a tent type over, was also custom made, it was only for sleeping, and that was also made double, for the girls, on the big girls on top, separately there was a floor between, and the boys on the bottom, it was all custom made, so, then when we got older, and we were traveling, my dad and my mom in the front there, like you could see there, we were sat in the back there between, it's like a connection, there was a connection, there was, between the wagon and that trailer, that little trailer there, was not that little, and we used to sit there, and used to sing all the way, harmony from the first to the second, the four sisters about the same age there, we used to sing good harmony together, that my dad used to say, he sometimes commanded if you get the better of his friends, and he said, i want you to listen to my daughter, you know, we were sitting there, and we had to sing the harmonized one german song out another, you know, and this is just a little excitement, what i told you about, growing up with those type of wonderful, wonderful things, wonderful, wonderful things, and you only have those lifetimes once, and you don't ever get that chance again, that's why i said you should enjoy all your growth, all your growing up with all my children, it goes by so fast. what language did you speak in your family? we speak german, of course, but we also speak, if you're with the other people, they speak that like a romnus language, okay, and that we speak, then we spoke that with the old folks didn't speak english, a german, they spoke with that romnus, so we're kind of, like you know, if you're italian descent, and your mother speaks italian, and you speak english, of course, you don't ever speak it with the mother, but you do know the language, somehow you learned it from your parents, and then somebody comes to your home, and you do not speak, they don't speak english, so you have to kind of use, so that's how we learned the little there, but i mean, between us was the german, and of course, if i wanted to talk about something, if we girls wanted to talk about something, we talked the romnus, i do it today with my children, my children learned. yeah, so today when we are somewhere, you can't even speak german, because a lot of people speak german here, so i use the romnus language, my kids don't, but they do, even my friends, and they're 24, he's doing real good with it. were most of your friends other gypsies, who were they, ethnic germans? no, we had some of the girls who we met out there in the gypsies, of course, we had some there, and that's for short times, the important, the long lasting, the long lasting friendship was both ways anyway, but with steadiness is when we got home to beedenkopf, and then of course, there was six months where we were there, and went to the school, we went to the place, we went to, just going for work sunday mornings, we take a couple of kids along, and we walked up in the hill, i know we had a dog, we had a dog, his name was charwob, my dad, was my oldest brother's dog, my dad had bought it for him, and that dog was 17 years old, and he got blind, so of course the dog grew up with us, most of us grew up with that dog, some of them weren't even born yet, but halfway through, like myself, we were raised with that dog, so he was 17 years old, he was blind, and had to be put away, my dad said, you cannot do that anymore, so of course you could imagine what was going on, my oldest brother, heinrich, got sick over it, he was 17, and of course we all, but he hired a forester, and he shot him, and then we buried him out up on the hill, on the pine tree, and this was, got to be known to all the children, there was bigger stock, charwob buried there, everybody brought little flowers, and little crosses, and that tree was all carved with different names, and it's been there for years, for years, we grew up with that, that hill up there, and it was quite a walk, and my mother, sunday mornings, it was after church, we had to go to church, and it was because she was cooking, early church we had to go, they were cooking, my mother and my dad, my dad loved to cook, sunday was, she helped her, and she says, like julia, julia, never mind, don't you in a kind eishwest, take the little ones there, one or two or three, and take a nice little work, bring charwob some flowers up there, just to get rid of this for a while, take a little bit of kids for a while, and that's the way it was, you know, and all the, our friends too, oh well let's take a walk up to charwob, here's something to do, and on the way up there we talked away, you know what i mean, nice. tell me, you went to church on sundays? yeah. what were you raised? i was, my mom was a catholic, my father was a protestant, and somehow they decided they raised us as a protestant lutheran, so my mother never went to the lutheran church, my mother kept her religion, she didn't go to catholic church either, but she had her little statues, she did her little beliefs, but she did not go to church with us, my dad, every sunday, that's one thing he did, he took us to church, and boy if we weren't there, that was one thing, he worked up there with his little slew there, one after the other, we had all, put our shoes in the, this and that, anyway, we did go to church, and then as, go to school, you have to go to catechism, we did that, and of course when you're 13, 14, you go to confirmation, you finish with your school, and then you have to go into some household things, from just before i went, we got arrested, i had just started my household year, i was about 15 when i started, it was like, because he kept me for the, he had a job, the war was already starting at that time, and he was working for the city there, pulling wood with a wagon, cutting wood for the city, and so he kept us as long as he could, but that was a must, you had to go for that year at that particular time. the government required this? it was a requirement, yes, that you did go something for a year. just the girls? just the girls. and of course, boys automatically went in to learn, like in leering, they went into, you know, girls didn't go in too much for the learning and training at that time, there was house-gitten, housewife, learning how to cook and how to clean, you know what i mean, that's the situation. so, house was very important. i know my sister in this one particular household, it was a big gas station, they owned, it was a husband and wife, older folks, and, with german people, and they had a, another gas station, had a big 13 room home there, did a lot of entertaining, and my oldest sister, mathilde, who died in the camp, she worked there for a year. my sister, lena, she worked there for a year, and it was my turn now to go, and at first they told me all the nice things, how what's going on, and i noticed later on that old man, he looked like the old man in the mountains, i have a picture, he looked just like that, and she was pretty old herself. we need to stop here for the tape. okay. thank you. thank you.