1995. We're with a survivor, Julia Backer Lentini. I am Liane Herbst. We are in Hemet, California, the United States of America. We are speaking English. It is November 12-- It is November 12th, 1995. I am with survivor Julia Backer Lentini. I am Liane Herbst. We are in Hemet, California, the United States of America. We are speaking English. Would you please tell us your name and spell it? My name is Julia Lentini. Could you spell it for us? I will spell Lentini. Julia, J-U-L-I-A. Lentini, L-E-N-T-I-N-I. And where were you born? I was born in Eisern, Germany. Could you spell that for us, please? Eisern? It's E, capital E-I-S-S-E-R-E-N. And when were you born, please? I was born April 15, 1926. And did you grow up in Eisern? I did not grow up in Eisern. I grew up in Biedenkopf, Biedenkopf, Germany. I lived there with my family. I was born for the summertime, and we were out there with wagons. And I was born out there in a hospital, somewhere in Eisern. I am a Gypsy. My family was Gypsy. We traveled around in the summertime over in Germany when we were children, my whole family. And my mother had this year in Eisern, next year in Mudersbach. Every 14, 15 months-- my had 14-- 15 children, eight boys and seven girls. And I was born in Eisern, at-- somewhere in the hospital there. And-- Tell me-- you were born in the summertime. What was summertime like as a Gypsy girl? As a Gypsy girl? It was beautiful, the best time. In the morning, you get up with the birds. At night, you sleep with the stars and the moon. My parents-- my father was a we called it in German. In Germany, he was He was a basket-weaver. He was a horse trainer, also. And that's what he used to do in the summertime. We leave there in April, May sometimes-- all depends how the weather was-- and we got back when the frosts came. And he made all his money and his living in the summer out there. Then when we-- when we got home, of course he had horses. He continued his horse trading business there. We had a barn. My right across the street was the barn, and there we had horses. Pigs for our own for And it was a wonderful life we had as children. This was a life we loved. This was the life we knew. And of course, we did go to school in the summer. I need to remind-- say this, that we did go to school. In all different parts, wherever we were, what town, city, wherever-- if it was for three days, it was for two days, we went to school. We had a book, and it had to be signed by the principals in each particular town. And it just had to all harmonize together. We weren't missing any school. Because that's the only way my parents could take us out of school. And that's how we were raised. And then we had our steady schooling in the fall, when we got home. Where was home? Home was Biedenkopf. And there we are at a steady home. My dad had bought a home before I even was born there. And I think they had four or five children when they bought that house, and we just grew up in that house. When I left Germany, I went to the United States, that was there, my family still in there. Today it's still a Backer house, because my-- one of my nephews bought the place. So, going back to the-- the-- the Gypsy life, it's-- it was a wonderful life. I mean, I can't say anything else about it. It-- it-- it's even alive, it's hard to explain. You really have to live that type of a life. Little artistic. My dad was in the weaving business, making baskets, fine stuff, furniture. And my mother had her children, and we were taking care of each other. But it was a good life. We had lots of love. That's one thing I have to say. Lots of children. Maybe not too much with the the clothes and the situation, but we had a lot-- ate all the time. What did you eat? Plenty of food. Plenty of food! All the German foods, the and the potato soup, and the-- and they get vegetables. You know, they get That's a-- that's a good life. And I have benefit from that short life that I had with my family, my childhood. Tell me what a summertime day was like. Let's just pick a day in July. What would it be like? Day in  July? Oh, was a hot-- it's hot and humid! We-- it wasn't too good. The spring and the fall is nice, but the-- that's hot. Germany's humid. The humidity there is the worst thing. Well, in the morning, we got up and we had to go to school. Did you feed-- take care of animals or anything first? No, the boys had to do that. No, the boys had to do that. But we, as young girls, when we were young girls, we each had our chores, of course. What were your chores? Taking care of the little ones, the next under me or the next above me. Not so much above me, the one under me. But each had our share raising children. Helping to raise each other, because there were so many of them. And this is something we just did automatically. We knew what we had to do, and we done it. The boys did help with the animals. Oh, yeah. And then later on, as I got older, as we got older, we were home in the fall, and my father had the pigs and the-- and the horses, of course. And occasionally, he would take some cows in. And we-- the children took care of it, you know. The boys got bigger, and they helped with the business, and the girls had to help. We had to help with washing, and we also had to take turns with cooking, and darning. You know, there was plenty of wash to do, and there was no automatics, like we have today. It was all-- we had a wash-- a they called it. And there was strictly two, three days on the side just for washing. The white clothes was boiled. Sometimes in the-- in the-- in the-- when the sun-- sun was out, that was hung into the sun. Was brought back in again. We would have to rinse it again. And that-- everything was clean, of course. It was much more work then. Much easier today. So-- So you'd get up in the morning and go to school. Go to school. And of course, this wasn't easy sometimes, you know, being in-- of course we were used to it. It's just that when you come strange school again, and school again, we had to make friends, you know. Sometimes was easy. Sometimes it was a little harder to make friends, you know. But-- And then after school time, we had to go-- we came home. And we weren't picked up, like they do today. We had to walk. Sometimes we were a mile away from the school, or two miles, and we just-- four or five of us, we just marched down to the school. Didn't think nothing of it. We were at the school, we marched back. Sang, sometimes got in trouble. Stopped on a somewhere, where they were playing games or something was going on, and we didn't go straight home. Well, our mother was mad. She was worried. She was mad, because she was waiting for certain things to be done. So we got plenty of little-- I don't know how to say it. But we have plenty of-- she had a little stick, a little wooden stick, that came out once in a while. That's the way we were. There was a little punishment. Did she ever use the stick on you? She sure did. What did you do that-- You know, it well, it was not so much the stick. My mother was left-handed. And when mother got going, she'll call, Julia! Before she got to me-- Betty, Susie, Lena, George-- whoever, she-- she called all 14 of them before she got that 15th one, you know? And that's the way it was with-- I said, Mom, I didn't do it! But that left hand just went automatically everywhere. And that's the way it was, you know. Oh, well, I'm sorry. Well, you happened to sit there, so there it was, you know? There was too many of them, you know. And we knew that. So-- but we loved our mom. Our mom, and our dad, too, they were wonderful parents, whatever they done, for-- what-- taught us, taught us beautiful things, but most of all, love. It never went away. I think we love each other now more, for we've gotten older. And some of them passed away, and it's just-- you can't buy that in the drugstores. You can't get it anywhere. This is something you have from home, from as a child. And that's the way it was. I need to wipe my eyes a little bit. Can I do that? OK. How did you travel? Everything by wagons, horses. Or we had bikes. We had-- I remember my sister Mathilde, who died now, she was-- she was-- had-- she was working, doing some work for some-- was a big bakery there, and they had cows and animals, and she had a job there. And out in the fields, too, mowing the grass and everything. In those days, they didn't have all this machinery stuff. They had those you know. I don't know what they call that here in America. Cut the grass with, you know, with-- we called it a There's like a hand stick on it. A scythe? It's like a OK. What they called it. And that went in her leg, and she cut her ankle on that. So she had to be hospitalized, and they took her to Marburg, 33 kilometers from Biedenkopf. And we used to go visit her on the bikes, 33 kilometers gone, and 33 kilo-- there was no problem at all. Those days, that's how we-- that's all we knew. You know, no fancy buses and fancy this and that. But-- this-- and it was-- we done this. If you say today, 33 kilometers gone, and 66 kilometers on a bike? You know what I mean? It was a daily routine, really. And I don't know how I got to talk about that. You were telling me about the wagons and the bikes. Oh, so there was no-- you know, if the wagon, if my dad was-- sometimes my dad was hired for doing the fieldwork, like plowing their fields, because we had the horses and the equipment. So my dad did that kind of work, also. Now, of course, the bigger girls or the boys was around, had to help. Drive the horses, or he loaded up the wagons. And you know, 13, 12, no matter what age you were, if you were capable of doing it. And we wanted to do all this. This was something-- because we were always together. We took our lunches with us, then. and and And we had in the afternoon, And then again, 7 o'clock, we had So we were all looking forward to these things. And it was-- it was-- it was nice. It was just-- we don't have all those problems, what my own children have today. I tell them those little things, this is-- it's just unbelievable. And we-- we were happy with that. We really loved it. And wonderful family. And you slept under the stars in the summertime? Under the stars. Sometimes we go to bed-- was-- in May, let's say May. May 1, my dad sometimes left early. And that was-- if we got up-- woke up in the morning was a light blanket of snow, light snow out there. It only lasted for a day or so, because it was already late in the season. But it happened with us a few times, that we got up and-- went to sleep with the stars and woke up with a little white snow there on the thing. And life had to go on, and it went on. We just put the heavier jackets on and did our thing, whatever we had to do. How far would you travel in a given summer? We traveled from-- you know, Germany, you-- everyone knows Germany, I'm pretty sure. From to What was it, about six hours one way, or six hours. Although those days with the wagons, we'd probably travel about 20, 30 kilometers sometimes. Not always. That's a-- that's a long thing with horses and wagons to travel. But my dad used to, especially in the summer, when it was too warm for the horses, then we left early, early in the morning or later at night. And we had the little they call it, hanging on there for lights, you know what I mean? There was no street lights on those side streets like that. But sometimes we drove late at night or very early in the morning, about 4 o'clock. And I mean, you didn't have to worry about traffic. There was no cars going. Everybody was with the horse and the wagons, you know. But the weather condition had a lot to do with the traveling plans, too. So he kind of knew. We were three days, sometimes a week, sometimes two weeks, on some of those parking spots where we would park. Sometimes only three days or two days. All depends how the-- the business was. They make a living, of course, you know. And it sounds unbelievable, but it's a gorgeous life. Beautiful, happy, happy, happy life. If I had to do it all over again, I would do it. Even now, my 70 years old, I would do it. What about the town life? Beautiful town, as-- as you've see in some of the pictures I showed you. It's a small town. It's not that small anymore now, but it was-- I think there were 900 or 1,200 at that particular time. It's going to be a big city now. But everybody knew everybody. The schools, you know, wonderful teachers, and everybody admired our lives. They always said, oh, I wish I could-- and many times, we did take some from the neighbors with us for the summer. They-- Mrs. Schmidt or Mrs. Johnson, whoever it was, came to see my mother and said, oh, yeah, Ellie wants to go with you. So some-- you got enough of your own, but always one of them came along. My mother had fed 14. She fed 15 or 18. Many times, neighbors said, Mrs. Backer, how can you? You got a whole for yourself, you know? But well, you cook for 12 or 15, you cook for 18. So we always had somebody eating there. And I'm the same way. You come in my house today, there's always enough food for a couple extra people. You know-- Did they ever take one of your best friends with you? Always. School friends, well, we still-- I have two of my girlfriends, we just had our 50th golden-- for confirmation. They gold for 50 years ago in confirmation, and we graduated from school. And there's three of them, still, we used to horse around with. And those three girls, those two and myself, we're still around. What are their names? Emma is one and Ellie is the other one. Last names? Emma Culver and Emma-- Elly Craver. Wonderful girls. We were real little, actually, troublemakers when we were little. We used to climb trees worse than the boys. We-- and then, you know, the boys, was fighting with us, wanting to make this and that. But we always stuck together, the three of us. So-- and we grew up and did confirmation together, and the church together, in-- in the time we had, in the wintertime, when we're home. So I think we were about-- if you-- if you really count the months when we were out, from May till first frost-- it was always in the beginning of October-- we were home. And then from October on till May again, this is school. Steady schooling, OK? And in the summer, of course, it was-- but we did OK. So school was year-round in Germany? All year round. Oh, yeah. They get the-- At Christmas, they get off a few week, I think, a few days. And there's some kind of a summer vacation, also. And then, of course, we didn't have to go to school then. That was-- we looked forward to that, too. And we didn't have to go on the you know, and we were out there somewhere. But we were looking for that, too. It was about two or three weeks, I think, we had off, you know what I mean, from the school. But-- Tell me, I'm curious. How did 15 children fit in one wagon? Yeah, I want you to know something. We had that wagon, like I showed you in one of the pictures, one of the wagons. Remember, that wagon was 6 to 7 feet long. It was almost like a circus wagon, if you really look at it, but it wasn't. This was special-- my dad had a wagon made every year, every year, new wagon. Because being the-- the business handler the way he was, and the end of the season, in August, end of August-- they called it Arolsen. They had a big-- like a fair there. And all the Gypsies, all the men that came there with their animals, with the-- this and the cows and the horses and the sheep, and-- that's where all the business was done. And where was this? Arolsen. Is it-- is that a town? It's a town, Arolsen, yeah. And it's very known for that-- like Pomona here, for the fair. This Arolsen was known for this, to-- to those with the animal kingdom. And of course, they had rides, and this and that, and music, and whatever they had there, you know what I mean? But this was every year. And when my dad pulled up-- they were all waiting already. The are mostly the dark-- there's a black Gypsy and there's the light Gypsy. There's two different types. And always waited for my dad, because they knew he was coming in with a new wagon. And there was There is With money made-- my mother always hated that we go to that Caucasian there, because she had to start packing. So they got an old wagon, and my dad sold the wagon, the new wagon, or maybe a couple of horses with it. Anyway, made always business there. And my dad used to have them custom-made. Custom-made, like I told. They were 7-- 7 meter, 6 meter, 7 meter. And I think they're 4 meter wide. Now, I remember that I was about-- just before we went into the camp, I remember we had the last few years, he had them-- they were all made out of wood. Carving, fancy carving. And on the edge, he had, like, lions carved. And four on each edge of the wagon, the lions carved. And the windows, he had etched glass on them, like a trumpeter from some famous person with the-- and the inside was done real beautiful, too. It had double beds in the back. Now when did bigger children, the boys, when they got bigger, we had a little we called it. A little A little trailer with a tent tied over it. It was also custom-made. That was only for sleeping. And it was also made doubled for the girls, the big girls on top. Separately, there was a floor between, and the boys on the bottom. It was all custom-made. So then when we got older and we were traveling, my dad and my mom in the front there, like you could see there. We were sat in the back there, between-- it's like a connection. There was a connection there between the wagon and that trailer, that little trailer there. It was not that little. And we used to sit here and used to sing all the way. Harmony from the first to the second-- the four-- we were four sisters about the same age there. We used to sing good harmony together. Then my dad used to say-- he would sometimes command it if he got together with his friends. I want you to listen to my daughters, you know? So we were sitting there, and we had to sing there, harmonize one German song after another, you know what I mean? And this-- this is just little excitement, what I told you about, growing up with those type of wonderful, wonderful things. Wonderful, wonderful things. And you only have those lifetimes once, and you don't ever get that chance again. That's why I said you should enjoy your growth, all your growing up.  I tell my children that it goes by so fast. What language did you speak in your family? We speak German, of course. But we also speak-- if you were in with the other people, they speak like a Romani's language, OK? And that we speak. Then we spoke that with the old folks who didn't speak English-- German. They spoke with that-- that Romanis. So we're kind of-- like, you know, if you're Italian descent and your mother speaks Italian and you speak English, of course, you don't ever speak it with the mother. But you do know the language. Somehow you learned it from your parent. And then somebody comes to your home, and you do not speak. Because they don't speak English, so you have to kind of use-- so that's how we learned, a little here and a little there. But I mean, between us was the German. And of course, if I wanted to talk about somebody, if we girls wanted to talk about somebody, we'd talk the Romanis. I do it today with my children. My children learned. Yeah, so today when we are somewhere, you can't even speak German, because a lot of people speak German here. So I use the Romanis language. My kids don't, but I do. Even my grandson, at 24, he was doing real good with it. Were most of your friends other Gypsies? Or were they ethnic Germans? No. We had some of the girls who we met out there, and the Gypsies of course. We had some there and that was for short times. The-- the important, long-lasting-- long-lasting friendship was both ways, anyway. But with steadiness is when we got home to Biedenkopf. And then, of course, it was six months where we're-- were there, went to the school. We went to the plays. We went to-- just going for walks Sunday mornings. We'd take a couple of kids along and we walked up on the hill. I know we had a dog. We had a dog whose name was But my dad-- it was my oldest brother's dog. My dad had bought it for him. And that dog was 17 years old, and he got blind. So of course, the dog grew up with us. We all-- most of us grew up with that dog. Some of them weren't even born yet. But halfway through, like my-- myself, we were raised with that dog. So he was 17 years old. He was blind. And had to be put away. My dad said he cannot do that anymore. So of course, you can imagine what was going on. My oldest brother, Heinrich, got sick over it. He was 17. And of course, we were all. But he hired a forester and he shot him, and then we buried him out on the hill, on the wood, under a pine tree. And this got to be known to all the children. There was Backer's dog buried there. Everybody brought little flowers and little crosses, and that tree was all carved with different names. And it's been there for years, for years. We grew up with that, that hill up there. And it was quite a walk. And my mother on Sunday mornings, after church-- we had to go to church. And cooking. Early church, we had to go. They were cooking, my mom and my dad. My dad loved to cook. Sunday was-- he helped her. And she says, Julia? Julia? Take the little ones there, one or two or three, and take a nice little walk. Bring some flowers up there. Just to get rid of us for a while, get rid of the kids for a while. And that's the way it was. And all the-- our friends too. Oh, let's take a walk up to It's something to do, and on the way up there, we talked away, you know what I mean? It was nice. Tell me-- you went to church on Sundays. Yeah. What were you raised? We-- I was-- my mom was a Catholic. My father was Protestant. And somehow they decided they'd raised us as Protestant, Lutheran. So my mother never went to the Lutheran church. My mother kept her religion. She didn't go to the Catholic church either. But she had her little statues. She did her little beliefs, but she did not go to church with us. My dad, every Sunday, that's one thing he did. He took us to church. And boy, if we weren't there-- my, my, my, my. That was one thing. He'd walk up there with his little there, one after the other. We had all brushed our shoes, and this and that. Anyway, we did go to church. And then as-- for the school, you have to go to catechism. We did that. And of course, when you're 13, 14, you got to confirmation, you're finished with your school. And then you have to go into some household things. Just before I went-- we got arrested, I had just started my household year. I was about 15 when I started. he kept me for that. He had a job. The war was already starting at that time, and he was working for the-- the city there, pulling wood with the wagon, cutting wood for the city. And so he kept us as long as he could. But that was a must. You had to go for that year, that particular time. The government required this? There was a requirement, yes, that you did go something for a year. Just-- just the girls? Household-- just the girls. And of course, boys automatically went into like They went into-- you know, girls didn't go in too much for the learning a trade at that time. There was housewife, and learning how to cook and how to clean, you know what I mean? That's-- that's the situation. So house was very I know my sister, in this one particular household-- was a big gas station they owned. There was a husband and wife, older folks. And were German people, and they had a-- run a gas station. Had a big 13-room home there. They did a lot of entertaining. And my older sister Mathilde, who died in the camp, she worked there for a year. My sister Lena, she worked there for a year. And it was my turn now to go. And at first, they told me all the nice things was going on. They said-- then I noticed, later on, that old man-- he looked like the old man of the mountains. I have a picture. He looked just like that. And she was pretty old herself. OK, we need to stop here, for the tape.