So you were telling me you were being whipped at 75 whips. Exactly. I had-- what-- what they told me-- I had 75-- they had to stop because of the blood splashes. And I did wind up in that sick block, which they just had one. This was, compared to Auschwitz, a very small camp. This was a barrack type. They had quite a few barracks in there. But they only had one large sick block in there. And I woke up, and there I was in bed. And that's when I found out that the-- the nurse there, you know, person out there, is in there. And they studied medicine and this and that. And they handled the situation. Anyway, they were taking care of my back at the time. And-- so it must've been a week or so went by. And all of a sudden, I developed yellow jaundice. Laryngitis? Yellow-- yellow jaundice. Yellow jaundice. Yellow Jaundice. OK. Laryngitis. Yellow jaundice. OK? And so I had to stay there another week. In the mean-- now, we couldn't tell it's the end of the war now. In the meantime, I knew I was getting out of this. And I was gonna get better. And I going to lose my job, my kitchen job. And now I was threatened to think about going to the underground thing now. And so now, all of a sudden, they had was gone. And the kommandant was coming back in there, that same guy who had sent me in the first place, and walked right in the room. There was another gypsy girl on the other side. She had burned her leg against the wire. The electric wire pulled her on. And she had cut her ankle all the way through. So and her and I we're talking. And all of a sudden we heard And she said, Oh, god, it's Like, what does he want? My heart He's not gonna do something else to me now-- must be finished now. As he came in, stood right in front of my bed-- and-- well, bed, whatever they called it, that you lay on it. And he said, well, he said, do you want to change your mind? I said, no, commander. I said, I have told you all there is to tell. I said, you don't-- they're not through with me yet? He said, well, you know, I want you to know something. I don't believe you. But and I had this one. And I don't know how I said it. But it came out. And I said, I'll tell you what. The only thing I regret about all this that I lost my job. I had really loved-- I loved my job. I found it in Auschwitz. And I did a good job. And I said, the man did not help me. I said, I did that on my own. I said, just had the opportunity. I did this. And that's all there was to it. There's nothing else to it. So he said, well, I'm gonna tell you something. If you're out of here by next week, you get your job back. Well, I almost flipped out. I was so happy I was getting that job back. I didn't care if they kept me another 20 years. I got that job back. Well, the next day, there was an alarm. We called it a an air attack. And what was bombed is that ammunition factory, that underground factory-- was away from the camp, that underground factory. Now, from the bombs explosion there blew all those windows out of that sick block. They were-- the windows were all blown out. And the sick people, of course, you want to run out. Imagine that, I know how many, hundreds of people in that one block with the leg, and hopping, and the And the-- they hardly get through. It's-- there's about-- the whole thing as wide as here. And there's all kinds of rooms from both sides. And only the doors-- and same thing as in Auschwitz, one in the back. And this girl who was laying across from me-- and I remember she couldn't walk. Now, I jumped up. And I was opening the door. And I was-- was gonna to join the gang there, you know, with the rest of them. And she called my name. And I turned around. And I-- and I said, let me see if I can get you on my back. And remember, I just had this back business here going. So I had to-- oh, she says, I'll hold up, if you could hold me. And she says, it's not too long down the hall. I just want to get outside. This all happens in minutes, don't forget. You know, it seems like forever. But-- so here I picked her up, put her on my back, came out there. And I don't know if I make two steps or three steps. She was knocked off of me. Well, you know, people, when you're with lots of people, people get-- what do you call that? The-- people, like, you flip out. But there's a name for it, American word. I can't think of it. You get-- when people get hysteric, like. But there's a better word than hysteric, an American word. But I can't think of it right now. But everybody's out. People-- panic. Panic is the word, OK? You panic in those situations. And this is how you-- I got shuffled down. And she fell off of me. She laid there. They all hobbled over here. And of course, I was pushed out too. And-- Did you know at that point what had been bombed? You didn't? Barracks were never bombed. That underground ammunition factory were bombed. Were any of the girls in it at the time? A lot of people got-- a lot of the girls got killed there. OK? But the impact, it shook. That's how the windows blew out. Well, I was trying to tell you that that girl survived all that. Isn't that wonderful? Do you remember her name? They called her I don't know. You know last names didn't mean anything. And I had just happened to meet her in that sick block, because she was there. I heard about her that they-- she-- she went-- her sister was on the other side. And she had thrown that little piece of bread over the wire, and then underfoot was over there and pulled her up. And-- and it was-- this was seconds this thing comes through. And by the time they got her off, the prisoners threw blanket at her, and it was already about three quarters through there. So they put it back. And she got the limp. You know? But she kept her leg. So this is all those little things, what happened into that thing. So this was almost towards the end anyway. Now they were really close. And I think it was about a week later or so. I did get back to my job only for about a week. And that old man was still there. And I happened-- I told him everything. And the man was really-- he said, I did not want to go into this. We were-- we were drafted. This was an old man. It was not the regular, the Nazi that they called them there, SS. They just stuck him in there because they had nobody to put in there. The young boys, they're stuck out in the front, I guess. And the old fellas will guard them there. This was towards the end. And then the man told me, he said-- he said, just sit tight. This is gonna be all over in no time. Russians are Do you hear those guns? Those are Russians. So it won't be long now. And he was very well liked by all the prisoners. In the end, what they did, they left the wire on. They emptied all the magazines, all the storage, took all the foods out of there, took it, put them on their trucks, and took off. They told us, you're gonna leave. He said, don't We're leaving the-- the wire on. He says the Russians on one side and the Americans on the other side, whoever gets here first, you are gonna get freed. But in the meantime, we're leaving the wire-- the wire on. But they didn't say they emptied everything. And they took off. And that old man didn't go no place with them. He stood right there. He hid himself. And when they were gone, he showed up. And you know, the prisoners hid him. That's how-- that's much liked him. He was a very good person, that old man. Do you remember his name? I forgot his name. He's such a nice old man. You know, I was a young girl. Anybody old was nice then. That's the respect for the old folks. Really, not-- we never really got that close. It's just the little things He said his, you know, his family was bombed out too. And he lost his wife and his daughter. You see little things because you work with an old man like that all day long. He said, once in a while, came out you know? Because he had to be there. I'm sure he didn't want to be there at that time, those days. I was a difference, the real Their daughter out in the fronts. Or-- I don't event think they were up in Auschwitz anymore. They was pretty much cleaned out by that time. Although they found some of them left over in there. They wouldn't clean them all out. Well, this is where they ended there. And the Russians did come. What was the date? The Russians came-- now-- was it May-- May-- May 16 or May 18? Now we thought this was all finished. OK? We all done now. Well, so tell me about the Russians coming. Now, we're going to get free. The Russians are coming. We all skinny, bony things, what still was left over there. Now, they wouldn't let us out of there, the Russians. We had to be-- you German, you're going to Poland. You're going to France. You get into this. We have to get our working papers from them. Now, the only thing, what changed there was a little better food. But we still had to do our cooking in there. But the food was a little better because they had some-- brought some of their supplies in. How large was this camp? How many people? My gosh, I don't know. It was about 2,000 at least. It was all woman. All women. All woman. This was strictly woman, all woman. And now it's time we will exit now. OK. Now the Russian soldiers come. And they obviously-- understand, none of them could tell the times or anything like that. But who cared? We were free. They did tell us, you can't go out yet. We need to have you. Get your papers. Because when you go out there, the authorities want to know who you are. You need to have a paper. Are you a Nazi? Are you a prisoner? Are you this? Are you that? And what they did-- they brought us-- it was the worst thing they could've done. They brought us some civilian clothes. So here young people, you know, I mean, you're dying to get rid of those prison clothes. So we throw those-- those-- those whatever-- German, where they got it from. We wore the clothes. You know, we still couldn't go anywhere. We had to stay in the barracks. We had to like I said. We had to cook. But we were free, no guards walking on top of you anymore. So what did you put on? Oh, I don't know. I had a cute little blouse with a skirt. I was a skirt girl those days with a blouse. And three-- there was no hair there, you know? You could only go like this a little bit. But you felt-- Because all your hair was all shaved? Oh, we had short hair all the time. They They I guess they did that with protection with the lice. Plenty of those around me, you're dirty like-- you know, when you have to live that kind of life, you can't help. So they kind of pounded it down a little bit, you know, I mean, cut the hair, and everywhere every so often. And you so-- and you couldn't do it yourself because you don't have the supplies. You need things to do those things. You know? But then they have the Then they do it. They spray you and everything. And they used to-- Did the men shave you, or the women, or both? The men-- more men shaved that-- that kind of work than the woman. The woman just got the Did they ever like make sexual advances when they were shaving you? You know, the men-- the men, if you shied up to them, they had to-- terrible, you know what you mean? What do you think you've got there, and this and that. Yeah, I mean, they make you feel like-- you know, the little bit of respect you had left for yourself even, they want to take that away from you. You know what I mean? So that's the-- that's the way that situation-- situation went. But I was going to tell you something. You were telling me that-- so the Russians were processing you. They were-- that's the word for it. The Russians were processing us, exactly. There was a tall gypsy. It was a Polish girl. They called her They called-- we called her She was Polish. And she spoke a little Russian, the only one who could communicate with those Russians a little bit. And oh, she was yapping away pretty good there. And I said to her, I said, you know what? I wonder if we're-- there's a farm down here. There was a couple of farmhouses about three miles down the road. I wonder if we could walk down there, get ourselves some eggs. We were dying for some fresh eggs. And that that tall gypsy girl, said, oh, I'll go with you. And the said, oh, I'll go with you too tomorrow. We'll do it tomorrow. We'll walk down there. Well, that night, they had brought her in. She happened to be out when-- with the Russian guy in a She got raped from so many. I know how many soldiers, Russians. I said, oh, my god. How can that be? They're not allowed to do this. So I went to the-- to the-- to the captain, reported it to his Russian authorities there. And they told-- they told her, do you know any number of a car, or a truck? Any-- I mean, how can I do anything if you don't tell me who had done this? There's thousands of soldiers around here. Could never report him-- never reported him. She was bleeding. I was in shock. It was terrible. You found out this when she came back? You were-- As soon as-- no, that night when she came back. She took off with a soldier. Took-- took-- took her. And I guess they-- who knows? They went somewhere. And there were a whole bunch. Everywhere you went-- but those Russians were all over the place too. So you got-- you got scared to go out there. So did you go get the eggs, or no? Let me tell you something. Because that commander said, you take the number. You report him. We don't allow this. So that big, tall-- tall gypsies are dark, most of them. And she was dark. She said, we're going. And anybody comes around, I'll-- let me tell you something. I'll take down the number. So she says, let's go down there. It's only three miles. There's nobody there. They know. Never thought about the civilian clothes. If we only left our personal clothes on, we would have been OK. So we through a whole wooded area, walking through there and singing. We were happy because we were free and we were gonna go home. And counted the days. And we came to the farmer. And all kinds of dead animals laying out there in the-- in the there, you know? The food was still on the table. The old man was like in shock. And he said, I don't have no more eggs. He said, they killed all the animals. You could see that. He said, I got my wife and my daughter hidden up in the barn, the German guy, the farmer there. He said, we're so sorry. There's nothing we could do. We knew you were there. But there's nothing we could do. He means it. So we went in another. There's another farmhouse. And the guy had four or five eggs. So I said, oh, we better get back, She said, yeah. Yeah. We got to get going now. So we're back and run. And so we hit the wooded area. And all of a sudden, here comes a truck full with Russian soldiers. And we're walking. They coming down this way. We're walking this way. Through the woods, that road there, we could see the-- the-- the sunshine on the other side. So I said to her, oh, well, they wouldn't do nothing to us. You know, the camp wasn't even too far away from there. And they passed by us, turned in the middle of the road with their truck, came back by us this way, and pulled right in front of this thing. Must've been about 10 or 15 jumped down. And-- because you know, they come-- the Russian people are lightweight and beautiful blonde girls, tall, little black hair. And it was beautiful. She was a tall girl. And if not four or five grabbed a hold of her. And one them jumped down. He was full with-- I've never forgotten that-- full with-- he must have had acne or something, full with scars, little fat looking guy. And I did one scream. And somehow got onto me. And I ran. And I couldn't breathe no more. I had to stop. I turned around. And I see how they're hitting her with the gun. They were hitting her with the gun because she was trying to get away from all of them. Well, right then, beep, beep, a truck came, another truck. And they let her go. And she ran. So the truck passed them by. That was it. So-- and I said, I'm sorry. I-- we gotta get out of here. We got to get out of this wooded area. Let's go. They might turn around again. Well, what so-- and I just got my breath back. And she even couldn't. But somehow you run-- we ran. And then we heard-- they found they were playing game with us. Pching, pching, pching. They were shooting. They wouldn't-- they could have drove. They could have hit us if they wanted to, just enough to scare us, mind you. And she was bleeding. She was bleeding. And we got out of the woods. And of course went into the-- immediately to the commander and the commander for the Russian. Do you know in that-- all that mess that we remembered that number from the truck? Can you believe that, that-- with the truck number? He said, I told you girls. How can I do anything? Well, we weren't gonna leave no more. She went into the sick block. They took care of her. They were nice to her, OK? They did take care of her, gave her some stitches. She was very frightened. Was a big girl, tall girl, trying to get away from those guys. They were not allowed to do that. They knew that. And the only way they let her go is because that truck was coming. See? And-- that-- so this is the story about that. So anyway, I think we were there another week. Did they ever-- they never did anything to the guys? Couldn't. They didn't know. Didn't know. How in thousands of soldiers, who they gonna pick up if I can't tell you? And we were so sure now. We said, well, we're gonna look at that truck number. But they passed by us with no trouble, ning, right in the middle of the whole thing twice. Now, it's time for us to leave. We all goodbye. that Russian girl, she was-- never came really to. They sent her back to Poland, some French people. You know, we got-- there was four of us who had to go down near the Alba, because we lived on the other side of the Alba. Now on this side of the Alba was the Russians, where the American people had it. And they went back over the bridge, over on the other side of the Alba. And they said, well, there's the Russians. You keep their apart. And we're going to be all on this side. Now, we had the papers from the camp. Coming down near so many miles took us there to get there, we were supposed to cross that Alba River there. You had to walk, or they--? Walk, all walk. We had a few things. We kind of lost everything again. We left it all again. And there were four of you? There was four of us. Do you remember the names of the other three? Four of us. There was-- it was that gypsy, The one with the leg was there. There was another girl who was from Frankfurt somewhere, from Frankfurt, who was very close to home there by-- by where we were there. And of course, it was me. Now, we commandeered that river near the-- the thousands of German people for weeks. They only left so many of them over-- over that bridge, so many of them a day. The Americans did? The Russians. The Russians did. Americans on the other side. OK? Now there's some people that's Russian. OK, they want to get over on the side because their relatives and everything is all on that side. They live over on this side. OK? Now, we thought, oh, we got no problem. Get our papers here. What's the story? No story at all. Go into the commander there, to whoever the authorities are handled. showed him our papers. Yeah. Well, we have people in here with children for three weeks, for two weeks. You guys got to line up in the back. Was everyone else prisoners also, camp survivors? No. They were not camp survivors. They were prisoners. They were free people who wanted to go over on the other side. And all their belongings and baby carriages were German people, nothing to do. They're just from the war. They bombed. I was bombed. And they wanted to go back over there. They only let so many over. So we though because we being prisoners went into the camp, and they would let us go over. But they did not. They said to us that we would have to wait because those people here are already-- well, I thought in one way it was OK too, but us being the prisoners and everything. So that tall who got hit with the thing, she got a real brainstorm. Now, walking up on that Alba, every five-- let's say every half a kilometer there's a Russian with a gun, half a kilometer, another Russian. Now, the other side, nobody. It was American people on the other side, the American sol not the American people. It's Germany, but the American sol. American soldiers? American soldiers. You could hear the trucks flying over there. Because that Alba is-- is a big river there. I don't know if you know about that Alba. It's wide. You cannot swim there. And all you see is bodies floating down there too. Because people want to go swim-- get over there swimming. Shot them. They shoot them right in there. Now, the Russians have got it, OK? So what was her idea? So she came up. She was a little more older, a little more experienced than I. Don't forget that, just young, little, innocent girls. Little tough-- we toughened up a little being where we were, but innocent. So she bumped into some-- some-- some Russian soldier there who was half drunk. And there was a little paddle boat. You know those race boats, those pointy ones where you go with the I think only sit two people in there. That's all you could sit in there. So she's getting up to him. She says, you guys stay over here. And she's going over there. And between her little Polish she learned a little German, She made a little contact with the guy. And she said, she got some whiskey. He said, you gonna be here. she was telling him. And yeah, yeah. How to show you-- come-- come back. Wait till it gets a little dark. She says, can you let my friends over? You know? They want to go home. They're my friends. And I'll take care of you. And and you and I are gonna have a little party, and just let's get over there. Yeah. He said, Do it. Do it. Do it. So she said-- came back to us. She says, now we got a plan. We got to do it. Otherwise, we're gonna sit here another three months. She says, I'm gonna do the rowing. Number one, number two, I think I was the third one. Oh, and the third one was she. And now it's getting dark. So it was already a little There had to be because they couldn't allow it to. They weren't allowed to. He was just a plain soldier So she said, no. She said, when we hit that other side, forget about that boat. Let the boat go to heck. And run with all your strength and throw yourself over. Oh, see, you had to up on the riser like, then roll on the other side. And there was a freeway, the other one. So before he came to, there was nobody there, all the boats floating. And that's how we got over to the American zone. And there was another few days, we were home. We even got rides from the Americans, from the trucks there, picked us up there right away. No-- Was anyone from your family waiting for you at home? Oh, they already are. I was-- My brother, was there already. My sister, was there already. My brother I told you that. My sister, the one who died three weeks, she wasn't there yet. My sister, Charlotte was there. And so we were waiting. It-- it was kind of soon yet. You see? We were waiting for them. We didn't know where they were. Was your house still standing? House was still there. What happened, they told us the Nazis took it over. Some big shot Nazis stayed there for so many-- the years we were gone. But they took all the stuff, all the stuff we had in the house. There was nothing left in there. There was nothing left in there. But-- but material things, we had our lives. You know, I mean, the house was still there. We would have went there anyway. It was just-- land was there. Like my father said, that's where we're gonna meet. That's where we're all going to meet. What was the reaction of the Germans who stayed there. Were they glad to see you? Oh, yeah. And of course, they didn't know. I knew that-- they knew the same thing like we didn't know. Now, maybe the big shots knew, those political people. But the little neighbors in little primitive-- in-- those neighbors like who we worked and went to school with. Not that-- my mother had coffee with and No. The political world, I'm sure. The they all knew about all that. I'm sure. By the end of the war they knew though, didn't they? Oh, they even knew. Yeah, they knew then. They knew then. Oh, yeah. But when you were taken away, you don't think people knew what was happening? Not the neighbors there, but the-- the big shots, yes. Yeah, not the neighbors. Not those neighbors, no. Were you the first people from your town to be taken away? One one, only ones. There were no Jews in your town that were taken away? Were there any Jews in your town? We were the only ones. But were there Jews in your town when you were growing up? No? There wasn't any. That-- I told you, it was a little bit if a-- now, it's a big city. But it's just a little bit of a home town. Tell me again. How many people again then? It was about 900 those days. Now, I think they got a few thousand in that. I mean, and then they got a little factories going in there now. And they merge build. You know what I mean? A lot of other little things going there. So that's pretty good. It worked out pretty good as far as that was concerned. No. They didn't know. They didn't know. And we were good-- still good friends with every one of them. And of course, a lot of them passed away, the old folks. You know. And we used to reminisce about our parents, how good they were, and what they did, and this and that, and this and that. But I tell you, I hope from all this-- and I'm so glad this interview is there. Because things are really looking down, looking too good with the skinheads and all that stuff, that this somehow, somewhere will help discourage someone to get all this stuff going again, that never, never, never, never should happen, never again this should happen to any one, any Jewish religion, people, Polish people-- I don't care who-- the human race, not a-- not a one. And no organization, no government of anywhere in this world should allow that. They should totally-- they shouldn't even allow the skinheads even in fun, even in-- but we didn't know. We old folks know better. There should never been allowed for anywhere to get even that much a hair next to the situation, that it was even an idea that it could actually happen again. And it is not just this country. It's the whole world. Thanks. Let's stop here.