so you were telling me you were being whipped at 75 whips? exactly. i had, what they told me i had 75, they had to stop because of the blood splashing. and i did wind up in that sick block. which they just had one, this was compared to auschwitz, very small can. this was a barrack type, they had quite a few barracks in there, but they only had one large sick block in there. and i woke up and there i was in bed and that's when i found out that through the nurse there, you know, prisoner, there were just prisoners in there. and they studied medicine and this and that and they handled the situation anyway. they were taking care of my back at that time. and so it must have been a week or so went by and all of a sudden i developed laryngitis. laryngitis? yellow, yellow jaundice. yellow jaundice. yellow jaundice, okay, laryngitis. yellow jaundice, okay. and so i had to stay there another week. now we're getting towards the end of the war now. in the meantime, i knew i was getting out of this and i was going to get better. i was going to lose my job, my kitchen job, and now i was threatened by going to the underground thing now. and so now all of a sudden they had aktung. aktung was gone and the commandant was coming back in there, that same guy who had sent me here in the first place and walked right in the room. there was another gypsy girl on the other side. she had burned her leg against the wire. the electric wire pulled her arm and she had cut her ankle all the way through. so her and i were talking and all of a sudden we heard aktung, aktung. she said, oh, okay, this is the commandant coming. i said, what does she want? my heart went down. she said, she's not going to do something else to me now. it must be finished now. as he came in, stood right in front of my bed and, my bed, whatever they call that, their leyana. and he said, well, he said, do you want to change your mind? i said, no, commandant. i said, i have told you all this to tell. i said, you don't, you're not through with me yet. he said, well, i want you to know something. i don't believe you. but, and i had one and i don't know how i said it, but it came out. i said, i tell you what, the only thing i regret about all this, that i lost my job. i had really loved, i loved my job. i found it in auschwitz and i did a good job. and i said, the man did not help me. i said, i did that on my own. i said, just had the opportunity. i did this and that's all there was to it. there's nothing else to it. so he said, well, i'm going to tell you something. if you're out of here by next week, you get your job back. well, i almost flipped out. i was so happy. i was getting that job back. i didn't care. we kept it another 20 years. i got that job back. well, the next day there was an alarm. we call it a flig alarm, an air attack. and what was bombed is that munition factory, that underground factory was away from the camp. that underground factory. now, from the bombs explosion there blew all those windows out of that sick block. they were, windows were blown out. and the sick people, of course, you want to run out. and imagine that, i don't know how many hundreds of people in that one block with the lake and the hop and the dinghy and the, you could hardly get through. it was about a hall thing. it was white as hell, okay. and there's all kinds of rooms coming and going on both sides. and only the doors, same thing as in auschwitz, falling back. and this girl who was laying across from me, now remember she couldn't walk. now i jumped up and i was opening the door and i was going to join the gang there, you know, with the rest of them. and she called my name and i turned around and i, and i said, let me see if i could get you on my back. and remember i just had this back business ago. so i had a, oh she said i'll hold up, she says if you could hold me. and she said it's not too long down the hall when we just want to get outside. this all happens in minutes, don't forget. you know, it seems like forever but. so here i picked her up, put her on my back, came out there. and i don't know if i made two steps or three steps, she was knocked off for me. well you know, people, when you're with lots of people, people get, what do you call that? people like to flip out, but there's a name for it in american words, i can't think of it. you get, you know, people get hysteric like, but there's a better word than hysteric in american words, but i can't think of it right now. but everybody's out, people panic, panic is the word, okay. you panic in those situations. and this is how you, i got shoved down, she fell off of me, she laid there. they all hobbled over here and of course i was pushed out too. and. did you know at that point what had been bombed? you didn't? the barracks were never bombed. that underground munition factory was bombed. were any of the girls in it at the time? a lot of people got, a lot of the girls got killed there, okay. but their impact shook, that's how the windows blew out. i was trying to tell you that that girl survived all that. isn't that wonderful? do you remember her name? they called her mom, i don't know, you know, last names didn't mean anything. and i had just met her in that sick block because she was, i couldn't bother her. that they, she went, her sister was on the other side and she had thrown that little piece of bread over the wire and then underfoot was over there warning thing and pulled her up and it was, it was second, this thing comes through. and by the time they got her off, the prisoners threw blanket at her and there was already a big water through there. so they put it back and she got the limp, you know, but she kept her leg. so this is all those little things that happened into that thing. so this was almost towards the end anyway. now they were really close. and i think it was about a week later or so. i did get back to my job only for about a week and that old man was still there. and i happened, i told him everything. and the man was really, he said, i did not want to go into this. we were drafted. this was an old man. it was not the regular, the nazi that they called him there. he says, they stuck him in there because they are nobody to put in there. young boys just stuck out in the front i guess and the old fellas, old gardeners, this was towards the end. and then a man told me, he said, just sit tight. he said, it's going to be all over in no time. russians already said, you hear those guns? i said, russians. they won't be long now. and he was very well liked with all the prisoners. on the end, what they did, they left the wire on. they emptied all the magazines, all the storage, took all the foods out of there, took it with them on their trucks and took off. they told us, they're going to leave. he said, don't try anything. we're leaving the wire on. he says, the russians on one side and the americans on the other side, whoever gets here first, you are going to get free. but in the meantime, we're leaving the wire on. but they didn't say they emptied everything. and they took off. and that old man didn't go no place with them. he stood right there. he hid himself. and when they were gone, he showed up. and you know, the prisoners hid him. that's how much liked he was. a very good person, that old man. do you remember his name? i forgot his name. he was such a nice old man. you know, i was a young girl. anybody old was nice. then you had a lot of respect for the old folks. really not. we'd never really gotten that close. it's just a little thing saved don hill. he said his family was bombed out too. and he lost his wife. and he started a few little things. but she worked with an old man like that all day long. once in a while, a little witch came out here, not in the same cell. because he had to be there. i'm sure he didn't want to be there at that time. it was a difference. the real mccoy, they were all dead or they were out in the front. i don't think they were even up in auschwitz anymore. i think it was pretty much cleaned out by that time. although they found some of them left over and they wouldn't clean them all out. well, this is where they ended their... and the russians did come. what was the date? the russians came now. was it may 16th or may 18th? now we thought this was all finished. okay, we're all done now. tell me about the russians coming. now we're going to get free. the russians are coming. we're all skinny, bony things, what still was left over there. now they wouldn't let us out of there, the russians. we had to be... you're german, you're going to poland, you're going to france, you're going to this. we had to get our walking papers from them. now the only thing that changed there was a little better food. we still had to do our cooking in there. but the food was a little better because they had some of their supplies in. how large was this camp? how many people? gosh, i don't know. it was about 2,000 at least. it was all women. all women. all women. this was strictly women. all women. and now it's time we've everyone that's it now. okay, now the russian soldiers come in the office. they understand. none of them could tell the times or anything like that. but who cared? we were free. they did tell us, can't go out yet. we need to have you get your papers. because when you go out there, the authorities want to know who you are. you need to have a paper. are you a nazi? are you a prisoner? are you this? are you that? and what they did, they brought us, it was the worst thing we could have done, they brought us some civilian clothes. so i hear young people, you know, i mean you're dying to get rid of that prison clothes. so we, we told us, those, those, those, whatever german, where they got it from, we wore the clothes. you know, we still couldn't go anywhere. we had to stay in our barracks. we ate, like i was saying. we had to cook. but we were morally free. no guards walking on top of you anymore. so what did you put on? oh, i don't know. i had a cute little blouse with a skirt. i was a skirt girl those days with a blouse and three, three, there was no hair there, you know. only cool, cool, like this a little bit. but you thought your hair was all shaved? oh, we had short hair all the time. they cut soon as they got a short, i guess they did that for protection with the lice. plenty of those around when you're dirty, like, you know, when you have to live that kind of life, you can't help. so they, they kind of counted it down a little bit, you know, i mean cut the hair everywhere, every so often. so, and you couldn't do it yourself because you don't have the supplies. you need things to do those things, you know. so, but then they have the end lousing time, then they do it. they spray you and everything. did the men shave you or the women or both? the men, more men shaved that, that kind of work than the women. the women just got to cool and they just cool. did they ever make sexual advances when they were shaving you? you know, the men, if you shied up to them, they had to, it was terrible, you know what i mean? what do you think you got there and this and that, you know what i mean, they make you feel like, you know, that little bit of respect you had left for yourself even, you want to take that away from you, you know what i mean. so, that's the way that's issued. but i was going to tell you something. you're telling me that the russians were processing you? they were processing, that's the word for it, the russians were processing us, exactly. there was a tall gypsy, it was a polish girl, a girl called mamcha, they called, we called her mamcha, she was polish. and she spoke a little russian, the only one who could communicate with those russians a little bit. and she was wrapping away pretty good there. and i said to her, i said, you know what, i wonder if we, there's a farm down here, there was a couple of farmhouses, but i'm three miles down the road, i wonder if we could walk down there, get ourselves some eggs. we have time for some fresh eggs. and that mom just sat tall, the gypsy girl said, oh i'll go with you. and the lager said, oh i'll go with you too tomorrow. oh we'll do it tomorrow, we'll walk down there. well that night, they had brought her in, she happened to be out, went with a russian guy in their civilian stuff. she got raped for so many, i don't know how many soldiers went after russians. i said, oh my god, how can that be? they're not allowed to do this. so, we went to the captain, reported to the russian authorities there, and they told her, do you know any number of a car, of a truck? i mean, how can i do anything if you don't tell me what we've done this? there's thousands of soldiers around here. could never report them. never report them. she was bleeding, i was in shock. it was terrible. you found out about this when she came back? no, that night when she came back, she took off with the soldiers, took her, took her, took her. and i guess, who knew, they went somewhere in the whole bunch, everywhere you went, but those russians were all over the place too. so you got scared to go out there. so did you go get the eggs or no? let me tell you something. because that commander said, you take the number, you report them, we don't allow this. so that big tall, tall ship, she was dark, most of them, she was dark. she said, we're gone, and anybody comes around us, let me tell you something, i'm taking the number. so she says, let's get down there, it's only three miles, there's nobody out there, no. i never thought about that civilian clothes, if we only left a person clothes on, we would have been okay. so we're swan-sling through, it was all wooded air, walking through it and singing, we were happy, because we were free and we were going to go home. and not that we counted the days, and we came to the farmer. and all kinds of dead animals laying out there in the good souls there, you know, the food was still on the table, the old man was like in shock. and he said, i don't have no more eggs. he said, they killed all the animals, you could see that. he said, i got my wife and my daughter hidden up in the barn. the german guy, the farmer there. he said, we're so sorry, there's nothing we could do, we knew you were there, but there's nothing we could do. so we went in another farmhouse, and the guy had four or five eggs. so i said, oh, we better get back now, let's get going. she said, yeah, yeah, we're going to get going now. so we're back and around, and we hit the wooded air, and all of a sudden here comes a truck full with russian soldiers. and we're walking, they're coming down this way, we're walking this way, through the woods, the road there, we could see the sunshine on the other side. so i said to her, oh, well, they wouldn't do nothing to us. the camp wasn't even too far away from there. so they passed by us, turned in the middle of the road with their truck, came back by us this way, and pulled right in front of this thing. must have been about 10 or 15 jumped down. and some, because, you know, they comfort the russian people, it's a light race, and a beautiful blonde girl was tall, little stubble black hair in her, beautiful, tall girl. and if not four or five, clapped all over her. and one of them jumped down, he was full with, i'll never forget, he must have had acne or something, full with scars. he was a little fat looking guy. and i did one scream, and somehow got onto the end, i ran. i couldn't breathe no more, i had to stop. i turned around and i see how they had her with the gun. they were hitting her again because she was trying to get away from all of them. well, right then, beep beep, a truck came. another truck. and they let her go and she ran. so the truck passed them by, that was it. so, and i said, i'm sorry, i gotta get out of here, we gotta have this wooded day, let's go, they might turn around again. well, what, so, and i just got my butt back and she even couldn't, but somehow we ran. and then they found they were playing a game with us. beching, beching, beching, they were shooting. they weren't gonna, they could have drove, they could have hit us if they wanted to. just enough to scare us, mind you. and she was bleeding. she was bleeding. and we got out of the woods and of course, we're into the immediate commandant there, to the command for the russian. do you know in that, all that mess that we remembered that number from that truck? can you believe that? that, with that truck number? she said, i told you girls, how can i do anything? well, we weren't gonna leave no more. she went into the sick park, they took care of her, they were nice to her, okay. they did take care of her. there were some stitches, she was fighting, it was a big girl, tall girl, trying to get away from those guys. they were not allowed to do that, they knew that. and the only way they let her go is because that truck was coming. see? and they took her. so this is the story about that. so anyway, i think we were there another week. did they ever, they never did anything to the guys? couldn't, but they didn't know. they didn't know how thousands of soldiers were gonna pick up, if i can tell you. and we were so sure now, we were, said, well, we're gonna look at that truck number. but they passed right by, there was no trouble. mmm, right in the middle of the whole thing, twice. and now it's time for us to leave, we are all good-bye. mom, john, that russian girl, she was, never came really to. they turned her back to poland, some french people, you know, we got, there was four of us who had to go down near the albert because we lived on the other side of the albert. now on this side of the albert was the russians, where the american people had it, and they went back over the bridge, over on the other side of the albert, and they said, well, there's the russians you keep there, through that part, and we're gonna be on this side. now we had the papers from the camp coming down near that, so many miles, took us a day to get there. we were supposed to cross that albert river there. had to walk, or did they? walk, all walk. we had a few things, we kind of lost everything again, we left it all again. and there were four of you? there was four of us. do you remember the names of the other three? four of us. there was the gypsy mumja, the one with the lake was there. there was another girl who was from frankfurt somewhere, from frankfurt, who was very close to home there while we were there, and of course it was me. now we're coming near that river, there's thousands of german people out there now, for weeks. we only left so many of them over that bridge, so many of them. the americans did? russians. the russians did? there's the other side, okay, now there's the people, it's russian, okay, they want to get over on the side, because they're relatives and everything's over on the other side. they live over on this side, okay. now we felt we've got no problem, we've got our papers here, what's the story? no story at all. we went to the commandante, to whoever the authorities had handled it, showed them our papers. yeah, well, we have people laying here with children for three weeks, for two weeks, you guys got a line up in the back. was everyone else prisoners also? camp survivors? no, they were not camp survivors. they were prisoners? they were free people who want to go over on the other side. all their belongings and baby carriages were german people. nothing to do, they're just, you know, from the war, they bombed, i was bombed, and they were a bit back over there. they only let so many over. so we thought, because we're being prisoners, warrant into the camp, they would let us go over, but they did not. they said to us that we would have to wait, because those people here already were, well, i thought in one way it was okay too, but us being the prisoners and everything. so that tall mom, she got hit with the thing. she got a real brainstorm. now walking up on that elbow, every five, let's say every half a kilometer, there's a russian with a gun. half a kilometer, not a russian. now the other side, nobody, it was american people on the other side. the american soul, not the american people, it's germany, but the american soul. american soldiers? you could hear the trucks flying over there, because that elbow is a big river there. i don't know if you know about that elbow, it's wide. you cannot swim there, and all you see, bodies floating down there too, because people wanted to swim, get over there swimming. shot them or they shoot them right in there. now the russians are at it, okay? so what was her idea? so she came up, she was a little more older, a little more experienced in life, don't forget that. these young little innocent girls, a little tough, they toughened up a little bit, the beam over work, but innocent. so she bumped into some russian soldier that was half drunk, and there was a little paddle boat. you know those race boats, those pointy ones where you go with the race? i think you only sit two people in there. that's all you could sit in there. so she's getting up to him, she says, you guys stay away, sit over here. and she's going over there, and between her little polish, she learned, and little german, whatever, she made a little contact with the guy, and she said, she got some whiskey. she said, you're going to be here, god, she was telling him, and yeah, yeah, i thought, well, how to show you, come, come back, wait till it gets a little dark, you know. he said, can you let my friends over, you know, they're going to go home, let my friends, and i'll take care of you, and i'm going to have a little party, and i just want to get them over there. yeah, you gotta, you say, gotta do it, do it, do it. so she said, came back to her, she says, no, we got a plan, we got to do it, otherwise we're going to sit here another three months. she said, i'm going to do the rolling, number one, number two, i think that was the third one, and the third one, now it's getting dark, so it was already a little finch, there had to be, because he couldn't allow it, they were not allowed to, he was just a plain soldier, i'll go out there. so she said, no, she said, well, we hit that other side, forget about that boat, let the boat go to heck, and run with all your strength and throw yourself over, because you had to go up on the rosset like, and then roll on the other side, and there was a freeway without one. so before he came to, there was nobody there, and the boat's floating, and that's how we got over to the american zone. and then there was another few days we were home. we even got rides from the americans on the trucks there. picked us up there right away, no. was anyone from your family waiting for you at home? oh, they already are. i was, my brother louie was there already, my sister blimey was there already, my brother louie, i told you that, my sister, the one who died, she wasn't there yet. my sister charlotte was there, and so we were waiting, because it was kind of soon yet, you see, we were waiting for them, we didn't know where they were. was your house still standing? house was still there, what happened, they told us the nazis took it over. some big shot nazis stood there for so many years we were gone, but they took all the stuff, all the stuff we had in the house, there was nothing left in there. there was nothing left in there. but what material things, we had our lives, you know what i mean, the elden house was still there. we would have went there anyway, it was just the land was there, like my father said, that's where you're going to meet, that's where we're all going to meet. what was the reaction of the germans who stayed there, were they glad to see you? oh yeah, and of course they didn't know, i knew they did, they knew the same thing like we didn't know. now maybe the big shots know, those political people, but the little neighbors, the little primitive neighbors, like we worked, went to school, my mother had coffee, grand chans, with their fear, i mean, no, the political world i'm sure, the wehrmacht, they all knew about all that i'm sure. by the end of the war they knew though, didn't they? oh, they even knew, yeah, they knew then, they knew then, all year. but when you were taken away, you don't think people knew what was happening? not the neighbors there, but the big shots, yes. yeah, i meant the neighbors. not those neighbors. were you the first people from your town to be taken away? only one, only one. there were no jews in your town that were taken away? were there any jews in your town? we were the only ones. were there jews in your town when you were growing up? there wasn't any. i told you it was a little bit of a, now it's a big city, but it was just a little bit of a hometown. tell me again how many people? it was about 900 those days. now i think they got a few thousand in there. i mean, they got a little factories going in there now and they merged, built, you know what i mean? a lot of other little things going there. so that's pretty good. that worked out pretty good as far as that was concerned. no, they didn't know. they didn't know and we were good, i still have good friends with every one of them. of course a lot of them passed away, the old folks, you know, and we used to reminisce about our parents, how good they were and what they did and this and that and that. but i tell you, i hope from all this, and i'm so glad this interview is that, because things are really looking, them looking too good with their skinheads and all that stuff, that this somehow, somewhere will help to discourage someone to get all this stuff going again. that never, never, never, never should happen. never again this should happen to anyone, any jewish religion, people, polish, i don't care who, to the human race, not a one. and no organization, no government of anywhere in this world should allow that, they should be totally, shouldn't even allow the skinheads, even in fun. even in, but we didn't know, we old folks know better, they should never been allowed for anywhere to get even that much hair next to the situation. there was even an idea that that could actually happen again. and it is not just this country, it's the whole world...