opa tell you 1995 were with a survivor julia baker i am leanne herst. we are in hemant, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. it is november 12th, 1995. i am with survivor julia baker-lentini. i am leanne herst. we are in hemant, california, the united states of america. we are speaking english. would you please tell us your name and spell it? my name is julia lentini. could you spell it for us? i would spell lentini. julia, j-u-l-i-a, lentini, l-e-n-t-i-n-i. and where were you born? i was born in iceland, germany. could you spell that for us please? iceland, e-e, capital e-i-s-s-e-r-n. and when were you born please? i was born april 15, 1926. and did you grow up in iceland? i did not grow up in iceland. i grew up in biedenkopf. i grew up in germany. i lived there with my family. i was born for the summertime. we were out there with dragons. i was born out there in the hospital somewhere in iceland. i am a gypsy. my family was gypsy. we traveled around in the summertime. i went germany. we were children. my whole family. my mother had this year in iceland, next year in wudesbach. every 14-15 months, my children had 14 children, 8 boys and 7 girls. and i was born in iceland somewhere in the hospital there. tell me, you were born in the summertime. what was summertime like? gypsy girl. it was beautiful the best time in the morning. you get up with the birds. at night you sleep with the stars and the moon. my father was in hundreds, we call that in german. he was in hundreds. he was a basket wievel. he was a horse trader also. that is what he used to do in the summertime. we leave there in april. may, sometimes, all depends on where the horse came. he made all his money in his living in the summer. then when we got home, he continued to go to the bus. we had a barn. my london house, the right across the street was the barn. we had horses, pigs for our own being, for our own bedof. and it was wonderful life. we had children. this was a life we loved. this is a life we knew. of course, we did go to school in the summer. i need to say this, we did go to the schools. in all different parts, wherever we were, what town? if it was for three days, it was for two days. we went to school. we had a book. we had to be signed by the principals in each particular town. it had to harmonize together. we were missing any school because this is the only way my parents could take us out of school. that is how we were raised. then we had our steady schooling in the fall. then we got home. where was home? home and speeding clubs. there we are. the house of steady home. my dad had bought a home before he was born there. i think they had four or five children when they bought that house. we just grew up in that house. when i left germany, i went to the united states. my family is still in there. it's a little bigger house because one of my nephews bought the place. going back to the gypsy life, it's a wonderful life. i can't say anything else about it. even in life, it's hard to explain. you really have to live that type of life. a little artistic. my dad was in a weaving business. making baskets, find stuff for a nature. my mother had her children. we were taking care of each other. it was a good life. we had lots of love. that's one thing i have to say. lots of children. maybe not too much with the clothes and the situation. but we had a lot. eight all the time. plenty of food. plenty of food. all the german foods that come from the lot. the potatoes are so open. they get vegetables. they can use this solution. that's a good life. i have benefit from that short life that i have with my family. my childhood. tell me what a summertime day was like. let's just pick a day in july. who was the hardest, hard and humid. it was too good. spring and the fall was not. but that's hard. germany is the humidity. the age is the worst thing. well, in the morning we got up and we had to go to school. did you take care of animals or anything first? no, the boys had to do that. no, the boys had to do that. but we as young girls, when we were young girls, we had our age. what were your choice? taking care of the little ones. the next on the meal. the next above me. not so much above me. the one on the baby. each had to share raising children. helping the race each other. because there were so many of them. this is something we existed automatically. we knew what we had to do. we had done it. the boys did help with the animals. in late run, as i got older, we got older and we were home. in the fall, my father had the pigs in the horses, of course. and occasionally he would take some cows. the children took care of them. the boys had to be bigger. they helped with the business. the girls had to help. we had to help with washing. we also had to take turns with cooking. and a donning. there was plenty of wash to do. there was no other man. it was like, well, today we had a wash. and a wash cushion, they called it. there were strictly two or three days on the site just for washing. the light closed was boiled. sometimes in the sun was out. that hung into the sun was brought back in again. we hadn't had the winds yet again. everything was clean, of course. it was much more work than it was easier today. so... so you get up in the morning and go to school? go to school. of course, it wasn't easy sometimes. because we were used to it. it says that when you come from school again and school again, we had to make friends. sometimes it was easy. sometimes a little harder to make friends. but then after school time, we went and had to go home. we went and picked up like they do today. we had to work. sometimes we were a mile away from the school. or two miles. four or five of us just marched down to school. didn't think not enough. we were in the school. we marched back, saying sometimes it's getting trouble. stopped on a spot, blood, somewhere where they were playing games or something was going on. and we didn't go straight home. no. my mother was mad. she was worried. she was mad because she was waiting for certain things to be done. so then we got plenty of little... i don't know how to say it. but we had plenty of... she had a little stick. a little wooden stick. she came out once in a while. that's the way we were. was it a little punishment? did she ever use the stick on you? she sure did. what did you do then? you know what? there wasn't so much the stick. my mother was left handed. and when my mother got gone, she called julia before she got to me. betty, susie, lena, shorosh, whoever she called, all 14 of them, she got that 15 one. and then she said, mom, i didn't do it. but that left-hand just went automatically everywhere. that's the way it was. i'm sorry. i happened to sit there. so there it was. there was too many of them. and we knew that. but we loved them. my mom was wondering about that too. they were wonderful parents. whatever they'd done. but the tortoise, tortoise, beautiful things. most of all love. it never went away. i think we love each other now more. we got older and some of them passed away. it's just you can't buy that in the truck stores. you can't get it anywhere. it is something you have from home, from as a child. and this is the way it was. i need to go out of my eyes a little bit. can i do that? how did you travel? everything by wagons, horses, all we had bikes. i remember my sister matilda who died now. she was working and doing some work for some big big great there. they had cows and animals. and she had a job there. and the fields too made worn the grass and everything. and those days they didn't have all this machinery stuff. they had those senses. they called that in america. we cut the grass with, you know, what's the name? we called it a sensor. it's like a handstick on it. and a size? it's like a sensor. okay. what did they call it? that sensor went in her leg and she cut her ankle on that. so she had to be hospitalized and took it to mom. we're 33 kilometers from beaten cuff. and we used to go visit her on the bikes. 33 kilometers gone and 3-3 kilometers. there's no problem at all those days. that's how we knew. no fancy buses and fancy doesn't that. but we've done this. you say it's 33 kilometers gone and 36 kilometers on a bike. it was a daily routine really. i don't know how i got to talk about that. you're telling me about the wagons and the bikes? oh, so there was no, you know, if the wagon, my dad was, sometimes my dad was hired for doing the field work. and i was like, plowing their fields because we had the horses and the equipment. so my dad did that kind of work also. and of course, the bigger girls or the boys was around, had to help. drive the horses or he loaded up the wagons. and so, you know, 13, 12, no matter what age you were, if you were capable of doing this. and we wanted to do all this. and we went to the office for some because we were always together. we took our lunches with us there, the fish stick morns and fish stick mitas and mitas asen. and then we had a afternoon, coffee and then again, 6, 7 o'clock, the other arm brought. so we were all looking forward to this thing. and it was nice. it was just, we don't have all those problems with my own children have today. and we were happy with that. we were really loved it. wonderful family. and you slept under the stars in the summertime? under the stars. sometimes we go to bed with somebody. me, let's say me. me first, my dad sometimes left early. and if we could walk up in the morning, it was a light, a blanket of snow. it was only last for day or so because it was already late in the season. but it happened. it put us a few times that we got up in the winter sleeping with the stars and woke up with the little white snow there on the thing. and life had to go on and on and went on. we just put the heavier jackets on and did our thing, whatever we had to do. how far would you travel in a given summer? we drove from, you know, germany. you're probably, you're everywhere. i know it's germany. i'm pretty sure. from krenz to krenz. what was it about? six hours, one way or six hours. although those days with the wagons were probably travel about 20, 30 kilometers. sometimes, not always. that's a long thing, but horses and wagons and the travel. but my dad used it, especially in the summer when it was too warm for the horses. then we left early early in the morning or later at night. we had the little schtalump and they called it hanging on there for lights. you know what i mean? there was no street lights on those side streets like that. but sometimes we drove late at night or very early in the morning, about four o'clock. i mean, you didn't have to worry about traffic. there was no cars going. everybody was with the horses. the weather condition had a lot to do with the traveling plants too. he knew three days or two weeks under some of those parking spots. sometimes only three days or two days. it depends on how the business was. let me get a living, of course. it sounds unbelievable, but it's a gorgeous life. it's a beautiful, happy, happy life. i had to do it all over again. i would do it even now. my 70 years old, i would do it. what about the town life? as you've seen some of the pictures i showed you this, it's a small time. that's not that small anymore now, but it was where i think they were 900 or 12 hundred idonas at that particular time. it's going to be a big city now. everybody knew everybody. the schools, wonderful teachers and everybody admired. i realized they always said, oh, i wish i could. many times we did take some from the neighbors for the summer. mrs. smith or mrs. johnson, everyone was kidding. they said, oh, yeah, i wish. ellie wants to go with just some, you got enough of your own, but always one of them came along. my mother had fed 14. she fed 15 or 18. many times, neighbors said, mrs. bigger. how can you? you got his whole sh-dalf for yourself. you know, you cook for 12 or 15. you cook for 18. so we always had somebody eating there. and i'm the same way you come in my house today. there's always enough food for a couple extra people. did they ever take one of your best friends with you? always. school friends. well, we still, i have two of my girlfriends. we just had our 50th golden, uh, for confirmation. they go for 50 years, the golden confirmation, and we graduated from school. and the three of them still, we used the house for us around it. and those three girls, those two and myself, we're still around. what are the names? emma is one. and ellie is the other one. last names? emma colvin on emma ellie craver. wonderful, people were real little, actually, shopping, i guess, very little. if the climb trees worse than the boys. and then, you know, the boys is gonna be fighting with us, want to make this net. but we always stuck together the three of us. so, and we grew up with the confirmation together and the church together. and in the time we happened, some interview in the time when we were home. so, i think we were about, if you really count the months when we were out for may, till the first frostness was always in the beginning of october. we were home. and then from october on, till may again, was the school. steady schooling, okay? and then the summer of christmas, but we did okay. so, school was year round in germany? all year round, oh yeah. they get, if i hadn't christmas, they get off a few, we got, think, a few days. and there's some kind of summer vacation also. and then, of course, we didn't have to go to school. that was, we looked forward to that too. and we didn't have to go on the global war, you know, maybe a while there somewhere. but we were looking for that too. i think that's about two or three weeks, i think. we had off, you know, i mean, this was just school. but... till me, i'm curious, how do 15 children fit in one wagon? yeah, i want you to know something. we had that wagon, like i showed you, one of the pictures, one of the wagon. and remember, that wagon was six to seven feet long. it's almost like a circus wagon, if you really look at it. but it wasn't. this was especially, my dad had a wagon made every year, every year new wagon, because a being of hand-luffs, business handled the way he was. and the end of the season, in august, end of august, they called it arnoldson. they had a thick, like a fair there. and all the gypsies, all the hand-l listen, that is... it's a town? it's a town on arnoldson, yeah. and it's very known for that, like pomona here, for the fair. all these arrows and was known for this, to those hundreds men with the animal kingdom. and of course they had them rights and this and that, music and beats, whatever they had there, you know what i mean? this was every year. and when my dad pulled up, they were all waiting already, their handles men are mostly the dark. they said, like gypsies, they're like gypsies, they're just two different types. and always waited for my dad because they knew he was coming in with a new wagon. and there was a handle. there was a handle. that money made. my mother always hated that. they go to that location there because she had to stop packing. so i took a gift to get an old wagon and my dad sold the wagon, the new wagon, maybe a couple of horses, waited. anyway, made always business there. and my dad used to have them custom made. custom made, like i told, they were seven, seven, made up. six made up, seven made up. and i think they're four made up right. now i remember the other, just before we went into the camp, i remember we had, last few years, they were made up of wood carving, fancy carving. and on the edge he had like lions carved. on four, on each edge of the wagon, the lions carved. and the windows, he had etched glass on them, like a trumpeter from taking some famous person with the... and the inside was not real beautiful too. they had double bits in the bag. now, in the bigger children, the boys, when they got bigger, we had a little unhanger we called it, little docket, little trailer, with the tent type over. it was also custom made. it was only for sleeping. and that was also made double. for the girls on the big girls on top, separately there was a floor between and the boys on the bottom. it was all custom made. so when we got older and we were traveling, like the mountain on the front there, like you could see there, we were set in the back there between, it's like a connection, there was a connection there between the wagon and that trailer, that little trailer there was not that little. and we used to sit there and used to sing all the way harmony from the first to the second to four, four sisters about to say, we used to sing good harmony together. that my dad used to sometimes command it if you get the benefit of his friends. i went to listen to my daughter. we were sitting there and we had to sing the harmonized one german song out of another. and this is those little excitement what i told you about, growing up with those types of wonderful, wonderful things. and you only have those lifetimes ones and you don't ever get that chance again. that's why i said you should enjoy all your growing up with all my children. it was by so fast. what language did you speak in your family? we speak german, of course. but we also speak, if you were in with the other people, they speak that's like a wrongness language. and that we speak. then we spoke that with the old folks who didn't speak english, a german. they spoke with their dead roomness. so we were kind of like, you know, if you're italian distancing and you're not just speaking italian and you're speaking english, of course. you don't ever speak it with the mother, but you do know the language. somehow you learn from your parents and then somebody comes to you and you do not speak. they don't speak english, so you have to kind of use. so that's how we learned the little thing. but i mean, between us was the german. and of course, if i wanted to talk about something, if you girls want to talk about somebody, we've talked the wrongness. i'll do it today with my children. so today when we are somewhere, you can't even speak german because a lot of people speak german here. so i used the wrongness language. my kids don't, but they do. even my friends and their 24-year-olds are doing real good with it. most of your friends are the gypsies who are the ethnic german. no. we had some of the girls who were met out there in the gypsies, of course. we had some day-and-a-s we'd take a couple of kids along and we'd walk up in the hill. i know we had a dog. his name was charles. my dad was my oldest brother's dog. my dad had bought it for him. and that dog was 17 years old and he got blind. of course, the dog grew up. most of us grew up with that dog. some of them weren't even born yet. but halfway through, like myself, we were raised with that dog. so he was 17 years old. he was blind. and he had to be put away. but that said, i'll do that anymore. so of course, you could imagine what was going on. my oldest brother, heinrich, got sick over it. he was 17. and of course, we were all. but he hired a forester and he shot him. and then we buried them out on the hill on the pine tree. and this got to be known to all the children. there was a big dog, a child, a bear, a bear. everybody brought little flowers and little crosses. and that tree was all carved with different names. and spent it for years. for years. we grew up with that. that hill up there. and it was quite a war. and my mother, in sunday morning, was after church. we had to go to church. and it was because she was cooking. early church, we had to go. they were cooking. my mother and my dad loved to cook. sunday was she helped her. and she says, julia, you know, never mind on the king. i switched on to take the little ones there. one or two or three. and take a nice little work, bring some flowers up there just to get rid of us for a while. and that's the way it was. and all the children, our friends too. now let's take a walk up the shore. here's some dude, and on the way up there. we talked the way. nice. tell me, you went to church on sundays. what we raised. i was my mom, my mom was a catholic. my father was a protestant. and somehow they decided they raised us as a protestant lutheran. so my mother never went to the lutheran church. my mother kept her religion. she didn't go to catholic church either. but she had her little statues, she did her little beliefs, but she did not go to church with us. my dad every sunday. that's one thing he did. he took us to church. and boy, if we weren't there, that was one thing. he woke up there with his little sleut there. and after the other, we were at all for such shoes. and anyway, we did go to church. and then as go to school, you have to go to catechism. we did that. and of course, when you're 13, 14, you go to confirmation. you finish when you're at school. and then you have to go into some household things. just before i got arrested, i had started my household year. i was about 15. and i started. i was like, he kept me for that. he had a job. the war was already starting at that time. and he was working for the city there. pulling wood with the wagon, cutting wood for the city. and so he kept as long as he could. but that was a must. you had to go for that year, that particular time. the government required this? there was a requirement, yes, that you did go for something. just the girls? just the girls. and of course, boys automatically went into like a layering. they went into, you know, girls didn't go into much for the learning. they traded that time. there was house, getting the housewife and learning how to cook and how to clean. you know what i mean? that's the situation. so house was very fun. i know my sister in this one particular household was a big gas station. it was a husband of all the folks and with german people. and they had a lot of gas station. they had a big 13 room home. they did a lot of entertaining. and my oldest sister, matilda, who died in the camp. she worked there for a year. my sister, lina, she worked there for a year. and it was my turn now to go. they told me all the nice things about what's going on there. then i noticed later on that old man. it looked like the old man in the mountains. i have a picture. it looked just like that. and she was pretty old herself. we need to stop here for the tape. thank you..