so you were telling me you were being whipped at 75 west? exactly. i had, what they told me, i had 75. i had to stop because of the blood splashing. and i did wind up in that sick block. which they just had one, this was compared to auschwitz, very small can. this was a barrack type, they had quite a few barracks in there, but they only had one large sick block in there. and i woke up and there i was in bed, and that's when i found out that through the nurse there, you know, there were just prisoners in there. and they studied medicine and this and that, and they handled the situation anyway. they were taking care of my back at that time. so it must have been a week or so went by. and all of a sudden i developed yelangitis. laryngitis? yellow giant. yellow giant. yellow giant, okay, yelangitis. yellow giant, okay. and so i had to stay there another week. now we're getting towards the end of the war now. in the meantime, i knew i was getting out of this now, i'm going to get better and i'm going to lose my job, my kitchen job, and now i was threatened to think if i go on the underground thing now. and so now all of a sudden they had, achtung, achtung was gone and the commandant was coming back in there, that same guy who had sent me here in the first place and walked right in the room. there was another gypsy girl on the other side. she had burned her leg against the wire. the electric wire pulled her on and she had cut her ankle all the way through. so her and i were talking and all of a sudden we heard achtung, achtung, she said, oh, achtung, what does she want? my heart went down and she said, you know, i'm going to do something else to me now, must be finished now. as he came in, i stood right in front of my bed and, uh, my bed, whatever they called that there, layanna. and he said, well, he said, do you want to change your mind? i said, no, commander. i said, i have told you all this to tell. i said, you don't, you're not true with me yet. he said, well, yeah, i want you to know something. i don't believe you. but, uh, and i had one, and i don't know how i said it, but it came out. i said, i'll tell you what, the only thing i regret about all this, that i lost my job. i had really loved, i loved my job. i found it in auschwitz and i did a good job. and i said, the man did not help me. i said, i did that on my own. i said, just had the opportunity. i did this and that's all there was to it. there's nothing else to it. so he said, well, i'm going to tell you something. if you are here by next week, you'll get your job back. well, i almost flipped out. i was so happy. i was getting that job back. i didn't care. we kept doing another 20 years. i got that job back. well, the next day there was an alarm. we called it a flea alarm, an air attack. and what was bombed is that munition factory, that underground factory was away from the camp, that underground factory. now from the bomb's explosion there, blew all those windows out of that sick block. they were, windows were all blown out. and the sick people, of course, you want to run out. imagine that, i don't know how many hundreds of people in that one block with the lake and the hop and the dinghy and the, you could hardly get through. it's about a whole thing is why they're here. okay. and there's all kinds of rooms coming to go on both sides. and only the doors and same thing as in auschwitz, run back. and this girl who was slain across from me, and i remember she couldn't walk. and i jumped up and i was opening the door and i was going to join the gang there, you know, with the rest of them. and she called my name. and i turned around and i, and i said, let me see if i could get you on my back. and remember, i just had this back business year going. so i had a, oh, she says, i'll hold up. she says, if you could hold me. and she says, it's not too long down the hall when we just want to get outside. now this all happens in minutes, don't forget. so, you know, it seems like forever. so here i picked her up, put her on my back, came out there. and i don't know if i made two steps or three steps. she was knocked off for me. well, you know, people, when you, but lots of people, people get, what do you call that? you feel like you flip out, but there's a name for it. in american word, i can't think of it. you get, you know, people get hysteric like, but there's a better word than hysteric in american word, but i can't think of it right now. but everybody's out, people panic. panic is the word, okay? you panic in those situations. and this is how you, i got shoved down, she fell off of me, she laid there. they all happened over here, and of course i was pushed out too. and – did you know at that point what had been bombed? you didn't? the bank, the barracks were never bombed. that underground munition factory was bombed. do any of the girls in it at the time? a lot of people got, a lot of the girls got killed there, okay? but the impact shook, that's how the windows blew out. i was trying to tell you that that girl survived all that. isn't that wonderful? do you remember her name? they called her mom, i don't know, you know, last names didn't mean anything. and i had just met up in the media in that sick block because she was there. i heard about her that they – she went – her sister was on the other side, and she had thrown that little piece of bread over the wire, and then underfoot was over there warning thing and pulled her up and – and it was – it was second, this thing comes through. and by the time they got her off to the prisoners through blanket at her, and it was already three-quarters through there, so they put it back and she got the olympian out, but she kept her leg. so this is all those little things that happened into that thing. you know, this was almost towards the end anyway. now they were really close. and i think it was about a week later or so. i did get back to my job only for about a week. and that old man was still there. and i happened – i told him everything. and the man was really – he said, i did not want to go into this. we were drafted. this was an old man. it was not the regular, the nazi that they called him there. he says, they stuck him in there because they had nobody to put in there. the young boys just stuck out in the front, i guess, and the old fellas were guarding the – this was towards the end. and then a man told me. he said, it's just – it's tight. he says, it's going to be all over in no time. russians already said, you hear those guns? they said, russians. they won't be long now. and he was very well-liked with all the prisoners. and in the end, what they did, they left the wire on. they emptied all the magazines, all the storage, took all the food, all the stuff. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they were all there. and they took all the storage, took all the foods out of there, took it with them on their trucks and took off. and they told us, they're going to leave. he said, don't try anything. we're leaving the wire on. he says, the russians on one side and the americans on the other side, whoever gets here first, you are going to get freed. but in the meantime, we're leaving the wire on. but they didn't say they emptied everything. and they took off. and that old man didn't go no place with them. he stood right there. he hid himself. and when they were gone, he showed up. and you know the prisoners hid him. that's how much liked him. he was a very good person, that old man. do you remember his name? i forgot his name. he was such a nice old man. you know, i was a young girl. anybody old was nice, didn't you? i learned some respect for the old folks. really not. we'd never really cut that close. it's just a little thing, save donald. he said his family was pumped out too. and he lost his wife. and he started a few little things, but she worked with an old man like that all day long. she had once in a while a little witch who came out here and understood himself. you know, he had to be there. i'm sure he didn't want to be there at that time. it was a difference. the real mccoy, they were all dead or they were out in the front. so i don't think they were even up in auschwitz anymore. i think it was pretty much cleaned out by that time. although they found some of them left over in there, they couldn't clean them all out. well, this is where they ended up. and the russians did come. what was the date? the russians came now. was it may, may 16 or may 18? how we thought this was all finished? okay, we're all done now. tell me about the russians coming now. now we're going to get free. the russians are coming. we're all skinny, bony things. what still was left over there. now they wouldn't let us out of there. the russians. we had to be – you're german, you're going to poland, you're going to france, you're getting the dish. we had to get our walking papers from them. now the only thing that changed there was a little bit of food. but we still had to do our cooking in there. but the food was a little better because they had brought some of their supplies in. how large was this camp? how many people? gosh, i don't know. it was about 2,000 at least. it was all women. all women. all women. this was a strictly woman. all women. and now it's time we're here on that side now. okay, now the russian soldiers come. and they obviously understand none of them could tell the times or anything like that. but who cared? we were free. they did tell us, can't go out yet? we need to have you get your papers. because when you go out there, the authorities want to know who you are. you need to have a paper. are you nazi? are you a prisoner? are you this? are you that? and what they did, they brought us some – it was a worst thing we could have done. they brought us some civilian clothes. so we hear young people, you know, i mean, you're dying to get rid of that prison clothes. so we told us, whatever germany, where they got it from, we wore the clothes. you know, we still couldn't go anywhere. we had to stay in that barracks. we ate, like i was saying. we had to cook. but we were morally free. no guards walking on top of you anymore. so what did you put on? oh, i don't know. i had a cute little flouse with a skirt. i was a skirt girl those days with a flouse and three – there was no hair there, you know. only cool girl. i did a little bit. but your hair was all shaved? oh, we had short hair all the time. as soon as i got a suit, i guess they did that for protection with the lies. there were plenty of those around me. and you're dirty like – you know, when you have that lived that kind of life, you can't help. so they kind of counted it down a little bit, you know. i mean, cut the hair everywhere, maybe so often. so you couldn't do it yourself because you don't have the supplies. you need things to do those things, you know. but then they have the end-lousing time, then they do it. they spray you and everything. and they used to – did the men shave you or the women or both? the men – more men shaved that kind of work than the women. the women just got the cool on these. they just cool. did they ever, like, make sexual advances when they were shaving you? you know, the men – if you shied up to them, they had to – it's terrible. you know what i mean? what do you think you got there and this and that? you know what i mean? they make you feel like, you know, that little bit of respect you had left for yourself even when they take that away from you. you know what i mean? so that's the – what's the way that's issued? but i was going to tell you something. you're telling me that – so the russians were processing you? they were processing – that's the word for it. the russians were processing us exactly. there was a tall gypsy. it was a polish girl. they called her mamcha. they called – i recall them mamcha. she was polish. and she spoke a little russian. she only wanted to communicate with those russians a little bit. and she – we happened away pretty good there. and i said to her, i said, you know what? i wonder if we – there's a farm down here. there was a couple of farmhouses. but three miles down the road, i wonder if we could walk down there and get ourselves some eggs. we were dying for some fresh eggs. and that mamcha said to all the gypsy girls, oh, i'll go with you. and then lalka said, oh, i'll go with you tomorrow. oh, we'll do it tomorrow. we'll walk down there. well, that night, they had brought her in. she happened to be out, went with the russian guy in the civilian stuff. she got raped for so many – i don't know how many soldiers went after russians. i said, oh, my god. how can that be? they're not allowed to do this. so we went to the captain, reported her to the russian authorities there. and they told her, do you know any number of a car, of a truck? i mean, how can i do anything if you go – you don't tell me what we've done this. there's thousands of soldiers around here. i could never report them. never report them. she was bleeding. i was in shock. it was terrible. you found out about this when she came back? when you were – as soon as we – no, that night when she came back, she took her off. when i told her, took her, took her. and i guess they went somewhere in the open – everywhere you went, but those russians were all over the place, too. so you got scared to go out there. so did you go get the eggs or no? let me tell you something. because that commander said, you take the number, you report them. we don't allow this. so that big, tall, tall ship, she said, i thought most of them, and she was dark. she said, we're gone, and anybody comes around us, i may tell you something. i'm taking the number. so she says, let's go down there. she says, only three miles. and nobody, yeah, they know. and never thought about that. so feeling close, if we only left our personal clothes on, would have been okay. so we swan's linked to it. we were all good at the area, walking through it and singing. we were happy because we were free and we were going to go home. and not that we counted the days, and we came to the farmer. and all kinds of dead animals laying out there in the gut holes there, you know. the food was still on the table. the old man was like in shock. and he said, i don't have no more eggs. he said, they killed all the animals. you could see that. he said, i got my wife and my daughter hidden up in the barn. the german guy, the farmer there. he said, we're so sorry. there's nothing we could do. we knew you were there, but there's nothing we could do. you know what i mean? so we went in another, there's another farmhouse, and the guy had four or five eggs. so i said, oh, we better get back. i said, let's get going. she said, yeah, yeah, we're going to get going now. so we were back and running. so we hit the wood at the area, and all of a sudden, here comes a truck full with russian soldiers. and we're walking. they coming down this way, we're walking this way. i drew the woods, the road there. we could see the sunshine on the other side. so i said to her, oh, well, they wouldn't do nothing to us. you know, the camp wasn't even too far away from there. had they passed by us, turned in the middle of the road with that truck, came back by us this way, and pulled right in front of this thing. must have been about 10 or 15, jumped down. and because, you know, they come from the russian people, it's a light race, and a beautiful brown girl was tall, a little stubble black hair, and it was a beautiful tall girl. and if not four or five, clapped all of her. and one of them jumped down, he was full with, i never forgotten that, full with, he must have had acne or something, full with scars. he was a little fat looking guy. and i did one scream, and somehow got onto the n.i. van. i couldn't breathe no more, i had to stop. i turned around, and i see how they hit her with the gun. they were hitting her again, because she was trying to get away from all of them. right then, beep beep, the truck came. another truck. and they let her go, and she ran. so the truck passed them by, that was it. and i said, i'm sorry, we've got to get out of here, we've got to get out of here for the day, let's go, they might turn around again. and i just got my butt back, and she even couldn't, but somehow we ran. and then they found they were playing the game with us. biching, biching, biching, they were shooting. they could have drove, they could have hit us if they wanted to. just enough to scare us, mind you. and she was bleeding. she was bleeding. and we got out of the woods, and of course we're into the immediate to the commandant, to the commandant for the russian. do you know in all that mess that we remember that number from the truck? can you believe that? that truck number? never believe that. he said, i told you girls, how can i do anything? well, we weren't going to leave no more. they went into the sick park, they took care of it. they were nice to her, okay. they did take care of, you know, some stitches. she was fighting with a big girl, tall girl, trying to get away from those guys. they were not allowed to do that. they knew that. and the only way they let her go is because that truck was coming, see? and so this is the story about that. so anyway, i think we were there another week. they never did anything to the guys? they couldn't, but they didn't know. they didn't know how thousands of soldiers were going to pick up, if i can tell you. and we were so sure now. we were, they said, well, we're going to look at that truck number. but they passed right by, no trouble. right in the middle of the whole thing, twice. now it's time for us to leave. we are all good-bye. some job, that russian girl, she was, never came really to, they sent her back to poland, some french people. you know, we got, there was four of us who had to go down near the alpe because we lived on the other side of the alpe. now on this side of the alpe was the russians, where the american people had it, and they went back over the bridge, over the other side of the alpe. and they said, well, there's the russians who keep that, through that part, and we're going to be all on this side. now we had the papers from the camp coming down near that, there's so many miles, took us there to get there. we were supposed to cross that alpe. do you remember that? you had to walk, or they? walk, all walk. we had a few things. we kind of were lost, everything again, we left it all again. and there were four of you? there were four of us. do you remember the names of the other three? four of us. there was the egyptian monkja. the one with the lake was there. there was another girl who was from frankfurt somewhere. they were from frankfurt, who was very close to home, thereby we were there. and of course it was me. now, we come near that river, near there's thousands of german people out there now, for weeks. we only left so many of them over that bridge, so many of them a day. the americans did? russians. russians did. yes, sir, on the other side. okay, now there's the people, it's russian. okay, they want to get all on the side because there are all these and everything's all on the outside. they live all on this side, okay? now we felt, oh, we've got no problem, we've got our papers here. what's the story? no story at all. go into the commandante, to whoever the authorities are, handle it, show them our papers. yeah, well, we have people laying here with children for three weeks, for two weeks. you guys got a line up in the back. was everyone else prisoners also? camp survivors? no, they were not camp survivors. they were prisoners? there were three people who want to go over on the other side. all that belongs in baby carriages with german people. nothing to do there, just, you know, from the war. they bombed, i was bombed a little bit back over there. they only let so many over. so we thought because we'd be in prisoners, worn into the camp, they would let us go over, but they did not. they said to us that we would have to wait because those people, they are already, well, i thought in one way it was okay too, but us being the prisoners and everything. so that tall mom, she got hit with the thing. she got a real brain storm. now walking up on that elbow, every five, let's say every half a kilometer, there's a russian with a gun. half a kilometer, not the russian. now the other side, nobody, there's some american people on the other side. the american soul, not the american people. it's germany, but the american soul. american soldiers? american soldiers, you could hear the trucks flying over there because that elbow is a big river there. i don't know if you know about that. it's wide. you cannot swim there and all you see is bodies floating down there too because people want to go swim, get over there, swim. shut them up, they'll shoot them right in there. now the russians are got it, okay? so it was her idea. so she came up, she was a little more old, a little more experienced in life, don't forget that there's young little innocent girls. little tough, a little bit of a beam over work, but innocent. so she bumped into some russian soldier that was half drunk and there was a little paddle boat. you know those race boats, those pointy ones where you go with the race? i think you only sit two people in there. that's all you can sit in there. so she's getting up to him. she says, you guys stay away. sit over here. and she's going over there and between her little polish, she learned, a little german, whatever. and she made a little contact with the guy and she said, she got some whiskey. he said, you're going to be here, for god, she was telling them, yeah, i hope, well, how to show you, come back, make it big till it gets a little dark, you know? he said, can you let my friends over, you know, they want to go home, let my friends and i'll take care of you and i and have a little party and i just want to give them over there. yeah, you say, do it, do it, do it. so she said, came back to, she says, now we got a plan, we got to do it, otherwise we're going to sit here another three months. she said, i'm going to do the rolling. i'm going to one, number two, i think i was the third one. and the third plan, when she, now i'm screaming, so it was already a little finch, there had to be because he couldn't allow it, they were not allowed to be, it was just a plain soldier, i go up there. so she said, no, she said, well, we hit that other side, forget about that boat, let the boat go to heck and run with all your strength and throw yourself over, because you had to go up and then rise it like it, then roll on the other side and there was a freeway without a one. so before he came to, there was nobody there anymore, the boat's floating up and that's how we got over to the american zone. and then it was another few days we were home. we even got rides from the americans on the trucks there, picked us up there right away and all. was anyone from your family waiting for you at home? oh, they already, yeah. i was, my brother louis was there already, my sister blimey was there already. my brother louis, i told you that. my sister, the one who died, three weeks, she wasn't there yet. my sister charlotte was there and so we were waiting because it was kind of soon yet, you see, we were waiting for them. we didn't know where they were. was your house still standing? house was still there. what happened? they told us the nazis took it over. some big shot nazis stood there for so many, the years we were gone, but they took all the stuff, all the stuff we had in the house. there was nothing left in there. there was nothing left in there. but what's material things? we had our lives. you know what i mean? the eldenhaus was still there. we would have went there anyway. it was just the land was there like my father said, that's where you're going to meet. that's where we're all going to meet. what was the reaction of the germans who stayed there? were they glad to see you? oh, yeah, and of course, they didn't know. i knew they did. they knew the same thing like we didn't know. now maybe the big shots know, those political people, but the little neighbors, the little primitive neighbors like where we worked, we went to school, my mother had coffee, crenshy, unsweetened, they're fair, i mean. no, not either political world, i'm sure. the beyrmeister, they all knew about all that, i'm sure. by the end of the war, they knew though, didn't they? oh, they even knew. yeah, they knew dan. they knew dan, all the way around. but when you were taken away, you don't think people knew what was happening? not the neighbors there, but the big shots, yes. yeah, i meant the neighbors. not those neighbors. were you the first people from your town to be taken away? only one, only one. there were no jews in your town that were taken away? were there any jews in your town? we were the only ones. were there jews in your town when you were growing up? no, there wasn't any. i told you it was a little bit of a, now it's a big city, but it was just a little bit of a home town. tell me again how many people? it was about 900 those days. now i think they got a few thousand in there. i mean, they got a little factories going in there now, and they merged, built. you know what i mean? a lot of other little things going there. so that's pretty good. that worked out pretty good as far as that was concerned. no, they didn't know. they didn't know. we were still good friends with every one of them. of course, a lot of them passed away, the old folks. we were just reminiscing about our parents, how good they were, and what they did, and this and that and that. but i tell you, i hope from all this, and i'm so glad this interview is there, because things are really looking down, looking so good with the skinheads and all that stuff, that this somehow, somewhere will help discourage someone to get all this stuff going again, but never, never, never, never should happen. never again this should happen to anyone, any jewish, religion people, polish, i don't care who, to the human race, not a one. and no organization, no government of anywhere in this world should allow that. there should be totally, there shouldn't even allow the skinheads, even in fun. but we didn't know, we all folks know better, they should never have been allowed for anywhere to get even that much hair next to the situation, that there was even an idea that that could actually happen again. and it is not just this country, it's the whole world. thank you. 1 you