so you were telling me you were being whipped at 75? exactly. they told me i had 75, i had to stop because of the blood splash. i did wind up in that sick block, which they just had one. this was a combat, the auschwitz very small can. this was a bariatric there. quite a few barracks in there, but they only had one large sick block in there. i woke up in there, it was in bed. that's when i found out that through the nurse there, we know the person i never purchased, the person i was in there. they studied medicine and they had a message with anyone. they were taking care of my back at that time. it must have been a week or so when my son i developed, you'll enjoy this. larry and jardis? yellow john. yellow john. the sokere, i enjoyed this. yellow john. so i had to stay there another week. in the meeting now we couldn't talk to you under the war now. in the meantime, i knew i was getting out of this now. you're going to get better and i'm going to lose my job, my kitchen job and now i was threatened to take it by going under the ground thing now. so now all of a sudden day after the lockdown was gone and the command dump was coming back in there. that same guy who had sent me here in the first place and walked right in the room. there was another chip secret on the other side. she had burned her leg against the wire. she had kept her angled all the way through. so in her and i were talking and all of a sudden we heard after the lockdown she said, oh, i just took my phone camera and said, what does she want? my heart was down. she said, i'm going to do something else to me now. must be finished now. as she came in, she stood right in front of my bed and bought bed whatever they call that. they're the layering. and they said, well, said you want to change your mind? i said, no command dump. i said, i have told you all this to tell us that you're not true with me yet. he said, well, yeah, i want you to know something. i don't believe you. but i had just one in, i don't know how i said it, but it came out. i said, i tell you what, the only thing i regret about all this. that i lost my job. i had really loved, i loved my job. i found it in auschwitz and i did a good job. and i said, the man did not help me. i said, i did that on my own. i said, just have the opportunity. i did this and that's all that was to. there's nothing else to it. so he said, well, i'm going to tell you something. if you are here by next week, you get your job back. well, i almost flipped out. i was so happy. i was getting that job back. i didn't care. we kept it another 20 years. i got that job back. well, the next day there was an alarm. we call it a flea alarm, an air attack. and what was bombed is that position factory, that underground factory was away from the camp, that underground factory. now, from the bombs explosion there, blue all those windows out of that sick block. they were, windows were blown out. and the sick people, of course, you want to run out and imagine that, i don't know how many hundreds of people in that one block with the lake and it happened. the thing, the hazy kit through, which is about a whole thing is why this here, there's all kinds of rooms coming to go. put sides and only to do all the same things in auschwitz on the back. and this girl, who was slain across for me, and i remember she couldn't walk. now, i jumped up and i was opening the door and i was going to join the game there, you know, with the rest of them. and she called my name. and i turned around and i said, let me see if i could get you on my back. and remember, i just had this back business here. so i had, oh, she says, a whole lot, she says, if you could hold me. and she says, it's not too long down the hall when we, we just want to get outside. that's all happens in minutes, don't forget, you know, it seems like forever. but so here i picked her up, put her on my back, came out there. and i don't know if i made two steps or three steps. she was not off for me. but you know, people, when you're with lots of people, people get, what do you call that? people feel like you flip out as a, what does a name for it in american word? i can't think of it. you get, you know, when there's a people get a staring light. but there's a better word than an exteric in american word. but i can't think of it right now. but everybody's out, people panic, panic is the word. okay? you panic in those situations. and this is how you, i got chuffed down and she fell off of me. she laid there. they all toppled over and off course i was pushed out too. and did you know at that point what had been bumped? you didn't bake the barracks were never bumped. that underground munitions factory was bombed. do any of the girls in it? not a lot of people got louder. the girls got to kill them. but the impact, the chook, that's how the windows blew out. well, i was trying to tell you that, that girl survived all that. and they were wonderful. do you remember her name? they called the mom, she, i don't know. you know last name, didn't mean anything. and i had just made up an emitter in that sick block because she was the actually a father that they, she went there. she was on the other side and she had thrown that little piece of bread over the wire. and then under foot was over there warning thing and pulled her up. and it was a second thing from strew. and by the time they got her off to the prisoners through blanket and it was already a quick water through there. so they put it back and she got the flimping up, she kept her leg. so this is all those little things what happened into that thing. so this was almost torturing and anyway, now they were really close. and i think it was about a week later or so. i did get back to my job only for about a week. and that old man was still there. and i happened to a man with everything. and the man was really, he said, i did not want to go into this. we were, we were drafted. it was an old man. it was not the regular, the nazi that they called him there. they were stuck in my neck because they had nobody to put in there. young boys just stuck out in the front. i asked him the old fellas old carpenter. this was towards the end. and then they man told me, he said, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's tight. it's going to be all over no time. russians are raised at those guns, the russians. they won't belong. now, and he was very relied with all the prisoners. and the end, what they did, they left the way on, they did all the magazines, all the storage took all the foods out of there, took it, put them on their tracks and took off. they told us, they're going to leave. he said, don't stray, leave in the way on. he says, the russians, on one side in the americans, on the other side, whoever gets here first, you are going to get freed. but in the meantime, we're leaving the life, the wire on. but they didn't say they emptied everything. and they took off. and that old man didn't go in no place with them. he stood right there with how he hit himself. and when they were gone, he showed up and you know the prisoners hit him. that's how much life, it was a very good person that put all men. do you remember his name? i forgot his name. i was such a nice old man. you know, i was a young girl. anybody old was nice, then you know, i learned so respect for the old folks. really not. we'd never really cut in that clothes. it's just the little things if, daniel. he said, he said, you know, his family was bound by two and he lost his wife. and he started a few little things because he worked with like, you know, the old man like that all day long. once in one little witch he came out in, i'm the same. he had to be there. i'm sure he didn't want to be there at that time. it was a difference. the real mccoy, they were all dead or they were out in the front. so i don't think they were even up and down streets. anyone i think was pretty much cleaned out by that time. although they found some of them left home in there, they couldn't clean them all out. well, this is where they ended up in the russians' sitcom. what was the date? the russians came now. was it may, may 16 or may 18? have we thought this was all finished? okay, we all done now. so tell me about the russians coming now? are we going to get free? the russians are coming. we all skinny, boning things. what still was left over there. now they wouldn't let us out of there. the russians. we had to be... you german, you're going to poland, you're going to france, you're going to this, we had to get our walking papers from them. now the only thing we changed there was a little better food. but we still had to do our cooking in there. but the food was a little better because they had some rotima there supplies in. how large was this camp? how many people? i don't know. it's about 2000, at least. it was a whole woman. a woman. this was a strictly woman. and now it's time, if you have a let's it now. okay, now the russians all just come and they obviously understand none of them could tell the times or anything like that. but who can't be free? they tell us, can't go out yet. we need to have you. get your papers because when you go out there, the authorities want to know who you are. you need to have a paper. are you not see? are you a prisoner? are you this? are you that? and when they did, they brought us a roasting. we could have done. they brought us some civilian clothes. so i hear young people, you know, i mean, you're dying to get rid of that prison clothes. so we stole us. we're having a german, anybody got it from. we bought the clothes. you know, we still couldn't go anywhere. we had to stay in that bag. we hate like i said, we had to cook. but we were more or more free. no guards walking on property anymore. so what did you put on? oh, i don't have a cute little flowers with a skirt. i was a skirt girl to stay with a blouse. there was no hair there. you know, you're only cool. like this a little bit. so you have us all shaved? oh, we had short hair all the time. they cut soon as the guy said, i guess they did that for protection with the lies. you know, plenty of those alarm. and you're dirty like they only have to have lived their kind of life. you can't help. so they've kind of counted it down a little bit. you know, i mean, cut them in everywhere. they're so often. so and you couldn't do it yourself because you don't have to supply. you need things to do those things, you know, so, but then they have the end-lows in time, then they do it. they spray you and everything. i mean, you should still. did the men shave you with the women or both? the men more men shave that that kind of worked than the woman. the woman just got to cool on these stages. cool. did they ever like make sexual advances when they were shaving? you know, the men, if you shied up to them, they had to be terrible. you know what i mean? what do you think you got there? and this and that, you know, i mean, they make you feel like, you know, they're a little bit of respect you had left for yourself even while they take me out of the way from you. you know what i mean? so that's the way that's issued. since you were perhaps going to tell you something. you tell me that the russians were processing you. they were processed. that's the word for a de russians for processing those exactly. there was a tall gypsie. it was a polish girl, a girl of a mom, a child. they called a mom, she was polish. and she spoke a little russian. the only one who came to communicate with those russians a little bit. and, well, if we happen to be very, pretty good there, and i said to her, i said, you know what? i wonder if there's a farm down here. there was a couple of farmhouses that three miles down the throat. i wonder if we could walk down the gyrse of some aches. we would die for some fresh aches. and that mom just said, that's all the gypsy girls, and oh, i go with you. and their lulker said, oh, i'll go with you too tomorrow. oh, we'll do it tomorrow. we'll walk down there. well, that night that brought her in, she happened to be out when with the russian guy in a civilian stuff. he got raped for so many, i don't know how many soldiers went after russians. i said, oh, my god. how can that be? they're not allowed to do this. so he went to the captain, reported that the russian had already stayed. and they told me, they told her, do you know any number of a car for trucking? i mean, how can i through anything if you go? you don't tell me, but we've done this. the thousands of soldiers around here could never report them. never if i'm just bleeding, i was in shock. it was terrible. you found out that when she came back, you were soon as we'd known that night when she came back? she took off when the soldiers took her, took her, took her. and i guess they went somewhere in the open. everywhere you went, but it was russian for all over the place too. so you got scared to go out there. so did you go get the eggs or no? let me tell you something. because that commander said, you take the number, you report them, build on allowed us, so that big tall troops is a dark most of them. and she was dark. she said, we're going. anybody comes around us. i may tell you something. i'm taking the number. so she says, let's get down. this is only three miles. they know. they know. and never thought about that. so feeling close if we only left our person close. i'm going to be okay. so i wish one's willing to, well, what are they? i am walking through it and singing a little happy. because we were free and we were going to go home. and not to become the days. and became to the farmer. and all kinds of dead animals laying out there in the good souls there. the food was still on the table. the old man was like in the truck. and he said, i don't have no more eggs. he said, they killed all the animals. you could see that. he said, i got my wife and my daughter. i hit up in the barn. the german guy, the farmer there. he said, we're so sorry. there's nothing we could do. we knew you were there. but there's nothing we could do. and i mean, it's just so we went in another. there's another farmer. and the guy had four or five eggs. so i said, oh, we're very bad. my children, let's see. go on. she said, yeah, yeah, we're going to get going now. so we're back in the barn. and so we hit the winter day. and all of a sudden he comes across. full wheat russian soldiers. and we're walking. they come and down this way. we're walking. and we could see the sunshine on the other side. so i said there all. they would do nothing to us. they came, wasn't even too far away from there. had their past spires turned in the middle of the road. but that truck came back by his face and pulled right in front of this. it wasn't fun that this thing. was to pin about 10 or 15 jump down. and because they come for the russian people's a light race and beautiful brown girls tall. little stopled black hair in the little beautiful tall girl. and if not four or five, crap to all of her. and one of them jumped down. he was full wheat. and i never forgotten that he must have had acne or something. full wheat scars. you're a little fat little guy. and i did one scream. and somehow got onto the ai man. i couldn't breathe no matter. i turned around and i see how they hit nerve with the gun. the rate never got me. she was flying the way from all of them. right then, be beep, truck came. another truck. and they let her go and she ran. so the truck passed and by. that was it. so, and i said, i'm sorry. i gotta get out of here. we gotta out this wood today. let's go there. they might turn around again. well, what? so, and i just got my butt back and she even couldn't have. but somehow you were right. we ran. and then we heard, they found they were playing game with us. but, jing, but jing, they were shooting. they weren't going to get a hooded throw of their cut of haters if they wanted to. just enough to scare us mind you. and she was bleeding. she was bleeding. and we got out of the woods and of course we're into the immediate to the command band. they have to remember the russian. do you know in that all that mess that we remember that number from the truck? can you believe that? but that truck number? never. i told your girls, how can i do anything? well, we weren't going to leave no more. she went into the sick bar. they took care of it. they were nice. they were okay. they take care of her. you were some stitches. she was playing fighting. she was a big girl. she was playing fighting. she was a big girl. trying to get away from those guys. they were not allowed to do that. they knew that. and they only way they left her goal. it's because that truck was coming. say? so this is the story about that. so anyway, i think we were there another week. did they never did anything to the guys? couldn't they? no. they didn't know how thousands of soldiers were going to pick up. if i can tell you. and we were so sure now. we were going to look at that truck number. but they passed right by. right in the middle of the whole thing. now it's time for us to leave. we are all goodbye. mom, jott, that russian girl. she was never came really to. they turned up back to poland. some french people. they were four of us who had to go down near the upper because we were lived on the other side of the upper. now on this side of the upper was the russians. the american people had it. and they went back over the bridge, over the other side of the upper. and they said, well, there's the russians. you keep that straight up hard. and we're going to be on this side. now we had the papers from the camp. come and down near that. there's so many miles to go there to get there. we were supposed to cross that out. women had to walk. we were there. walk. all walk. we had a few things. we lost everything again. we could live with all of them. and there were four of you. there was four of us. do you remember the names of the other? there was four of us. there was that gypsy mamcha. and one with the lake was there. there was another girl who was from frankfurt somewhere. there from frankfurt. she was very close to home. they were there. and of course it was me. now we commonly at that river near that thousand of german people have been there now for weeks. only left so many of them over. over that bridge. so many of them. a day. the americans did. the russians did. they had to run the other side. okay. now there's the people. there's a thrush. they want to get all one to side because they're all slaves. and everything's all one to outside. they live all one to side. okay. now we've got no problem. we've got a papers here. what's the story? no story. don't go on to the commandant there to whoever the authorities are handled. i showed them my papers. yeah. well, we have people in here with children for three weeks for two weeks. you guys got a line up in the back. was everyone else's prisoners also? camps of heaven. no. they were not camps of others. they were prisoners. they were three people who won a girl on the other side. all their belongings and baby carriages with german people. nothing did they just pull you know from the world. they bombed us bombed and then we were a bit back over there. they only let so many over. so we thought because we're being prisoners, one into the commandant they would let us go over. but they did not. they said to us that we would have to wait because those people are already well. what i thought in the one way was okay too, but us being the prisoners and everything. so that tall mom, she all got hit with the thing. she got a real praying storm. now walking up on that elbow. every five, let's say every half of kilometre. there's a russian with a gun. half a kilometre, not that russian. not the other side. nobody was some american people on the other side. the american soul, not the american people. it's germany, but the american soul. american soldiers? american soldiers. we could hear the trucks flying over there. they all is a big river there. i don't know if you don't know about that. i don't know if you don't know about that. i don't know why. you cannot swim with their end. all you see is bodies floating down there too. because people want to go swim, get over there swimming. shut them around their shoulder. why didn't they? no, the russians like that. it's okay. so it was her idea. so she came up. she was a little bold. a little more expensive. i don't forget that. there's young little innocent girls. a little tough. a little tough. a little of the people who were were. but innocent. so she jumped into some... some people were so happy. i was so happy. i was so drunk. and there was a little paddle boat. you know, there was a race boat. there was a point b once where you go with the race. i think you only said two people in there. so you could sit in there. so she's getting up to him. she said, you guys stay away. sort of over here. and she's going over there. and between her little polish, she learned a little german. whatever. she made a little camper to it. the guy. and she's in. she got some whiskey. he said, she's going to be here. and for god, she was telling them. and yeah, i hope. well, how to show you. come and come back. maybe to look at some old dark. you know, he said, can you get my friends over? you know, they want to go home. let my friends come out. take care. you and i are going to have to go party. and it's just to give them over there. but yeah, god, she said, god, i do need to do it. do it. so she said, came back to her. she says, now we have a time. we got to do it. otherwise, we're going to sit here another three months. i'm going to do the rolling. and i want to number two. take care of us. and the third point when she now is given dark. so it was already a little fence that had to be because he couldn't allow it. they were not allowed to. he was just a plain soul kind of art. so she said, now, she said, when we hit that, i have a side. forget about that boat. let the boat go to the head. and run with all your front and throw yourself over. so she had to go up on the water like it, then roll on the other side. and there was a freeway. it was out of it. i'm a four-he king, two. there was nobody there. and the boat's floating. and that's how we got over to the american soul. and there was another few days we were home. we even got the lights on the americans on the trucks. they picked us up there right away. no. was anyone from your family waiting for you at home? oh, they already are. i was up at the louis there already. my sister, blimey, was there already. my brother, louis, i told you that. my sister, this is the one who died three weeks. he wasn't there yet. my sister, she had a lot of rest there. and so we were waiting because we're kind of soon yet. you see, we were waiting for them. we didn't know where they were. was your house still standing? house were still there. what happened? they told us the nazis took it over. some big shot nazis took death so many. the years we were gone. but they took all the stuff. all the stuff we had in the house. there was nothing left in there. that was nothing left in there. but what's material things? we had our lives. you know, i mean, the elder house was still there. we would have went there anyway. it was just the land was there. my father said, that's where you're going to meet. that's where we're all going to meet. what was the reaction of the germans who stayed there? were they glad to see you? oh, yeah. and of course, they didn't know. i knew they did. they knew the same thing that i waited. no. now, maybe the big shots know those political people, but the little neighbors. a little primitive in this day. it was like, we were working on the school. not that my mother had coffee, friends, she had to sit in the field. i mean, no. not the political world. i'm sure the better my son, they all knew. but all that, i'm sure. by the end of the war, they knew they were just... oh, yeah. they knew, yeah, they knew then. they knew then. all the young. but when you were taken away, you don't think people knew what was happening? not the neighbors there, but the big shots, yes. yeah, not the neighbors. not those neighbors. were you the first people from your town to be taken away? or were they only ones? were they were only jews in your town? were they were only jews in your town? were they were only jews in your town? we were only ones. were they were were they were jews in your town? were they were jews in your town? were they were only jews in your town? when you were growing up? there wasn't any. i told you it was a little bit of a... now it's a big city. i see. but it was just a little bit of a home town. tell me you can't help any people. but about 900 to those days. now i think they got a few thousand in that. i mean, they got a little factory-scorned in their now and they merged built. you know what i mean? not a other little thing squashed there. so that's pretty good. that worked out pretty good as far as that was concerned. no. they didn't know. they didn't know. we were good, fresh, good friends with every one of them. of course, a lot of them passed away the old folks. every rest of the reminisce about our parents, how good they were and what, but they didn't disdependence. they tell you. i hope from all this. and i'm so glad to send the viewers that because things are really looking down looking too good with the skin hands and all that stuff. that this somehow, somewhere, will help the discourage someone to get all this stuff going again. that never, never, never, never should happen. never again, this should happen to anyone, any. jewish, religion, people, polish, i don't care who, to the human race, not a one. and no organization, no government of anywhere in this world should allow that. it should be totally, it shouldn't even allow the skin heads. even in fun. even in, but we didn't know, we all folks know better. there should never been allowed for anybody to get even that much. i hear next to the situation that they, they was even an idea that that could actually happen again. and it is not just this country, it's a whole world. let's stop here. thank you. thank you.