so you were telling me you were being whipped at 75? exactly. they told me i had 75. i had to stop because of the blood splashing. and i did wind up in that sick block, which they just had one, this was compared to auschwitz very small can. this was a barych type. they had quite a few barracks in there, but they only had one large sick block in there. and i woke up in there, i was in bed. that's when i found out the nurse there, you know, there was this person in there. and there's nothing medicine in this nothing, the handling situation anyway. they were taking care of my back at that time. so it must have been a week or so went by. and all of a sudden i developed, you'll enjoy this. you'll enjoy this? yellow john, yellow john, so cute. yellow john, okay. and so i had to stay there another week. now we're getting towards the end of the war now. in the meantime, i knew i was getting out of this now, i'm going to get better and i'm going to lose my job, my kitchen job, and now i was threatened to take it by going to the underground thing now. and so now all of a sudden they had, akhtung, akhtung was gone and the commandant was coming back in there, that same guy who had sent me here in the first place and walked right in the room. there was another chip secure and the other side she had burned her leg against the wire. the electric wire pulled her arm and she had kept her ankle all the way through. so her and i were talking and all of a sudden we heard akhtung, akhtung, she said, oh, it's like the commandant command, i said, what does she want? my heart went down, she said, you're not going to do something else to me now, must be finished now. as he came in, she took right in front of my bed and, uh, my bed, whatever they call that, they're the lay on her. and they said, well, you want to change your mind? i said, no commandant. i said, i have told you all this to tell. i said, you don't, you cannot prove with me yet. he said, well, yeah, i want you to know something. i don't believe you. but, uh, and i had one, and i don't know how i said it, but it came out. i said, i tell you about the only thing i read about all this, that i lost my job. i had really loved, i loved my job. i found it in auschwitz and i did a good job. and i said, the man did not help me. i said, i did that on my own. i said, just had the opportunity. i did this and that's all there was to it. there's nothing else to it. so he said, well, i'm going to tell you something. if you are here by next week, you'll get your job back. well, i almost flipped out. i was so happy i was getting that job back. i didn't care. we kept it another 20 years. i got that job back. well, the next day there was an alarm. we called it a flea alarm, an air attack. and what was bombed is that punishment factory that underground factory was away from the camp, that underground factory. now from the bombs explosion there blew all those windows out of that sick block. they were, the windows were blown out. and the sick people of course, you want to run out. and imagine that, i don't know how many hundreds of people in that one block with the lake and it happened, the dinghy and it has to get through. it's about a whole thing. it's whitish here. there's all kinds of rooms coming to go. both sides. and only the doors and same thing as the auschwitz on the back. and this girl who was slain across from me, now remember she couldn't walk. and i jumped up and i was opening the door and i was going to join the gang there with the rest of them. and she called my name and i turned around and i said, let me see if i could get you on my back. and remember i just had this back business here girl. so i had to put, oh she says that whole up she says if you could hold me. and she said it's not too long down the hall when we just want to get outside. that's all happens in minutes, don't forget. it seems like forever. so here i picked her up, put her on my back, came out there and i don't know if i made two steps or three steps. she was knocked off for me. you know people, when you have lots of people, people get, what do you call that? like if you flip out, there's a name for it in american word i can't think of it. you get, you know, people get hysteric like, but there's a better word than exterior, if in american word i can't think of it right now. everybody's out, people panic, panic is the word, okay. you panic in those situations. and this is how you, i got shoved down and she fell off of me, she laid there. they all hopped over here and of course i was pushed out too. and did you know at that point what had been bombed? you didn't, the barracks were never bombed. that underground munition factory was bombed. do any of the girls in it? at the time. no other people got a lot of the girls going to kill them, okay. but the impact, the shook, that's how the windows blew out. i was trying to tell you that that girl survived all that. isn't that wonderful? do you remember her name? they called the mum, i don't know. you know last names didn't mean anything. and i had just mapped in the media in that sick block because she was the active mother that they, she went, her system was on the other side and she had thrown that little piece of bread over the wire and then underfoot was over there warning thing and pulled her up and it was, it was second, this thing comes through. and by the time they got her off of the prisoners through blanco and atta and it was already a quick waters through there. so they put it back and she got the limping on but she kept her leg. so this is all those little things that happened into that thing. so this was almost towards the end and anyway now they were really close. and i think it was about a week later or so. i did get back to my job only for about a week. and that old man was still there. and i happened, i told him everything. and the man was really, he said, i did not want to go into this. we were drafted. this was an old man. there was not the regular, the nazi that they called him there. he says, they stuck him in there because they had nobody to put in there. young boys stuck out in the front. i asked him, the old fellas, old curtains. this was towards the end. and then they man told me. he said, it's tight. he said, it's going to be all over. no time. russians already said, you hear those guns? they said, russians. so it won't be long. now, and he was very polite with all the prisoners. on the end, what they did, they left their way on. they emptied all the magazines, all the storage, took all the food. they started there, took it with them on their trucks and took off. they told us. they're going to leave. he said, don't strike anything. we're leaving the wire on. he says, the russians, on one side, the americans, on the other side, whoever gets here first, you are going to get free. but in the meantime, we're leaving the wire on. but they didn't say they emptied everything. and they took off. and that old man didn't go no place with them. he stood right there. he hit himself. and when they were gone, he showed up. and you know the prisoners had him. that's how much life. it was a very good person to put all that. do you remember his name? oh, for god, his name was such a nice old man. you know, i was a young girl. anybody old was nice. then you had a lot of respect for the old folks. really not. we'd never really gotten that close. it's just a little thing, safe done. he said his family was bound out to. and he lost his wife. and he started a few little things. but she worked with an old man like that all day long. she said, once in a while, a little witch, she came out here and understand himself. you know, because he had to be there. i'm sure he didn't want to be there at that time. it was a difference. the real mccoy, they were all dead or they were out in the front. i don't think they were even up in auschwitz anymore. i think it was pretty much cleaned out by that time. although they found some left home in there, they wouldn't clean them all out. well, this is where they ended up. and the russians did come. what was the date? the russians came now. was it may, may 16 or may 18? and we thought this was all finished. okay? we're all done now. tell me that the russians coming now. now we're going to get free. the russians are coming. they all can eat bony things. what still was left over there. now they wouldn't let us out of there the russians. we had to be you german, you go on the poland, you go on the france, you get into this. we had to get our walking papers from them. now the only thing would change. there was a little better food. but we still had to do our cooking in there. but the food was a little better because they had some bought some of their supplies then. how large was this camp? how many people? gosh, i don't know. it was about 2000 at least. it was a whole woman. oh, a whole woman. this was a strictly woman. a whole woman. and now it's time to hear about that sit now. okay. now the russian soldiers come and the officer. they understand none of them could tell the times or anything like that. but who can't be were free? they did tell us, can't go out yet. we need to have you. get your papers because when you go out there the authorities want to know who you are, you need to have a paper. are you nazi? are you a prisoner? are you this? are you that? and what they did, they brought us some, what do you think we could have done? they brought us some civilian clothes. so i hear young people, you know, i mean you die in a little bit of that prison clothes or we saw those, those, those, whatever, germany, what they got it from. we wore the clothes, you know, we still couldn't go anywhere. we had to stay in that barracks. we, we ate, like i said, we had to cook. but we were morally free. no guards walking on top of you anymore. so what did you put on? oh, i don't know. i had a cute little flowers with a skirt. i was a skirt girl to stays with a blouse and three, three, there was no hair there, you know, only cool girl. like there's a little bit, but you have it all shaved. oh, we had short hair all the time. they cut soon as they got, i guess they did that for protection with the lights. now, play those around when you're dirty like, you know, when you have to live that kind of life, you can't help. so they kind of counted it down a little bit, you know, i mean, cutting in everywhere, every so often. so and you couldn't do it yourself because you don't have the supplies, you need things to do those things, you know, so, but then they have the end-lousing time, then they do it. they spray you and everything. and they use it. did the men shave you with the women or both? the men, more men shave that kind of work than the woman. the woman just got to cool on these days, it's cool. did they ever like make sexual advances when they were shaving you? you know, the men, if you shied up to them, they had to be terrible, you know what i mean? what do you think you got there and this and that, i mean, they make you feel like, you know, that little bit of respect you had left for yourself even when i take down away from you, you know what i mean? so that's the what's the way that's issued, since you were put up sometimes. you tell me that, so the russians were processing you? they were brass, that's the word for the russians were processing those, exactly. there was a tall gypsy, it was a polish girl like you're over mum, they called, i'll be called the mum, she was polish. and she spoke a little russian. they only want to communicate with those russians a little bit. and oh, she happened away pretty good there. and i said to her, i said, you know what? i wonder if there's a farm down here, there was a couple of farmhouses, but a three miles down the road. i wonder if we could walk down, they'd get herself some eggs. we were dying for some fresh eggs. and that mum just said to all the gypsy girls, oh, i go with you. and that lalka said, oh, i'll go with you too tomorrow. oh, we'll do it tomorrow, we'll walk down there. well that night, they had brought her in, she happened to be out when with the russian guy, in the shafili and stuff. she got raped for so many, i don't know how many soldiers went after russians. i said, oh my god, how can that be? they're not allowed to do this. so he went to the captain, reported his russian authorities there, and they told her, do you know any number of a car, of a truck, or any, i mean how can i do anything if you go, you don't tell me what we've done this. there's thousands of soldiers around here. could never report them. never before, she was bleeding, i was in shock. it was terrible. we found out that this when she came back, you were. no, that night when she came back, she took off, when i saw she took off, took off, took off. and i guess they went somewhere in the open, everywhere you went, but the russians were all over the place too. so you got scared to go out there. so did you go get the eggs or no? let me tell you something. because that commander said, you take the number, you report them, we don't allow this. so that big tall, tall chips are dark, most of them, and she was dark. she said, we're gone, and anybody comes around us, i may tell you something, i'm taking the number. so she says, let's get down, this is only three miles, nobody, they know. and never thought about that, it's a feeling close, if we only left our person close, i'm going to be okay. so we swans the link to it, well, all the way there, we're walking through it, we didn't sing and we were happy, because we were free and we were going to go home. and not to become the days, it became the farmer. and all kinds of dead animals laying out there in the goods house there, you know, the food was still on the table, the old man was like in shock. and he said, i don't have no more eggs. he said they killed all the animals, you could see that. he said, i got my wife and my daughter, i had not been the barn. the german guy, the farmer there, he said, we're so sorry, there's nothing we could do, we knew you were there, but there's nothing we could do. and i mean, so we went in another, there's another farmhouse, and the guy had four or five eggs. so i said, oh, we better get bad, man, let's go on. she said, yeah, yeah, we're going to get going now. so we were back and on until we hit the winter day, and all of a sudden he comes to the truck full of the russian soldiers. and we're walking, they're coming down this way, we're walking this way. and i drew the woods, the road there, we could see the sunshine on the other side. so i said to her, well, they wouldn't do nothing to us. they said, you know, the camp wasn't even too far away from there. let their pass by us, turned in the middle of the road with that truck, came back by us this way, and pulled right in front of this thing. what's the bin about 10 or 15? jump down. and because, you know, they come for the russian people as the light waves, and the beautiful brown girl was tall, a little stubble black hair in the little beautiful tall girl. and if not four or five, he crapped all over. and one of them jumped down, he was full of it, and never forgotten that full of it. he must have had acne or something, full with scars, he was a little fat looking guy. and i did one scream, and somehow got onto the air and i ran. i couldn't breathe no matter how to stop. i turned around and i see how they hit her, but they're with the gun. they were hit near the gun, because she was trying to get away from her. right then, bb truck came, not a truck, and they let her go and she ran. so the truck passed and by, that was it. so, and i said, i'm sorry, we've got to get out of here, we've got to out this way today. let's go, they might turn around again. well, what so, and i just got my butt back and she even couldn't, but somehow you right we ran. and then we heard, they found they were playing game with us. butching, butching, butching, they were shooting. they weren't going to, they could have threw off their could of haters if they wanted to. just enough to scare us, mind you. and she was bleeding. she was bleeding. and we got out of the woods and of course we're into the immediate to the commandant there to the command for the russian. do you know in that, all that mess that we remembered, that number from the truck? can you believe that? that, with that truck number? they were, they said, i told you girls, how can i do anything? well, we weren't going to leave no much. they went into the sick part, they took care of it, they were nice there. they, they take care of, you know, some stitches. she was going to fight them with a big girl and talk girl, trying to get away from those guys. they were not allowed to do that, they knew that. and the only way they let her go is because that truck was coming. see? and they took, they just, this is a story about that. so anyway, i think we were there another week. did they ever, they never did anything to the guys? couldn't, did they know? did they know? thousands of soldiers went there and i can't tell you. and we were so sure now, we were, they were, we're going to look at that truck number. but they passed right by, we're not, right in the middle of the whole thing, right? now it's time for us to leave, we are all good by. mom, jack, that russian girl, she was, never came really to. they turned back to poland, some french people, you know, we got, there was four of us who had to go down near the albert because we lived on the other side of the albert. now on this side of the albert were the russians, were the american people had it and they went back over the bridge, over on the other side of the albert and they said, well, there's the russians who keep that through that part and we're going to be all on this side. now we had the papers from the camp, coming down near that, so many miles took us there to get there, were we supposed to cross that albert. you had to walk or did they? walk, all walk. we had a few things, we kind of lost everything again and we could live with it all again. and there were four of you? there was four of you. do you remember the names of the other three? four of us. it was the gypsy mancha, the one with the lake was there. there was another girl who was from frankfurt somewhere, they're from frankfurt, who was very close to home there by where they were there and of course it was me. now we come near that river, near that thousands of german people have been there now for weeks. we left so many of them over or that bridge, so many of them. the americans did? the russians did? the russians did. the other side, okay. now there's the people, there's the russians, okay, they want to get all one on the side because they're all thieves and everything's all on the outside. they live all on this side, okay. now we felt we got no problem, we got our papers here. what's the story? no story now. we wanted to come on down there to whoever the authorities had handled, let's show them our papers. everyone else prisoners also? camp survivors? no, they were not camp survivors. they were prisoners? there were three people who wanted to go on the other side. all that belongs in baby carriages with german people. what did they do? they only let so many over. we thought because we'd be in prisoners, one into the camp, they would let us go over, but they did not. they said to us that we would have to wait because those people, they already were. i thought in one way it was okay too, but us being the prisoners and everything. that tall mom, she got hit with the thing. she got a real praying storm. now walking up on that elbow, every five, let's say every half a kilometer. there's a russian with a gun, half a kilometer, not a russian. not the other side, nobody. there's american people on the other side. the american soul, not the american people is germany, but the american soul. american soldiers? american soldiers. you could hear the trucks flying over there because that elb is a big river there. i don't know if you know about that elb is white. you cannot swim there. and all you see is bodies floating down there too because people want to go swim, get over this swimming, shot them on this river mine, isn't that? now the russians are gathered, okay? so what was her idea? so she came up, she was a little more old and a little more experienced in life. don't forget that there's young little innocent girls. little tough, little tough, a little bit of a beam over the world, but innocent. so she bumped into some, some sort of russian soldier that was half drunk and there was a little paddle boat. you know those race boats, those pointy ones where you go with the race? i think you only sit two people in there. it's all you can sit in there. so she's getting up to him, she says you guys sit over here and she's going over there and between her little polish she learned a little german, whatever. they do it, she made a little compa with the guy and she said, she got some whiskey. he said, you got to be here. god, she was telling them and yeah, i hope, well how to show you, come and come back. my picture gets a little dark, you know, he says, can you let my friends over, you know, they're going to go home, let my friends and i'll take care of you and i'll have a little party and i'll just let's get them over there. but yeah, she said, can't we do it, do it, do it. so she said, came back to her, she says, now we got a plan, we got to do it, otherwise we're going to sit here another three months. she said, i'm going to do the rolling, number two, i think i was the third one. and the third one, she, now it's getting dark, so it was already a little fenced, it had to be because he couldn't allow it, they were not allowed to, he was just a plain soldier, i got there. so she said, no, she said, well we hit that other side, forget about that boat, let the boat go to heck and run with all your strength and throw yourself over, because they had to go up and then roll on the other side and there was a freeway without a one. now before he came to, there was nobody there anymore, the boat's floating and that's how we got over to the american zone. and there was another few days we were home. you even got rights on the americans on the trucks, they picked us up there right away, no. was anyone from your family waiting for you at home? oh, they're already, yeah. i was, robert alui was there already, my sister, blimey was there already. my brother, louis, i told you that, my sister, vise, the one who died, three weeks, he wasn't there yet. my sister shot a lot over us there. and so we were waiting because it was kind of soon yet, you see, we were waiting for them, we didn't know where they were. was your house still standing? house were still there, what happened, they told us the nazis took it over. some big shot nazis took there for so many, the years we were gone, but they took all the stuff, all the stuff we had in the house, there was nothing left in there. there was nothing left in there. but what's material things? we had our lives. you know what i mean? the elden house was still there. we would have went there anyway, it was just the land was there, like my father said, that's where you're going to meet, that's where we're all going to meet. what was the reaction of the germans who stayed there? were they glad to see you? oh yeah, and of course they didn't know, i knew they did, they knew the same thing like we didn't know. now maybe the big shots know, those political people, but the little neighbors. and they were primitive in this day, it was like, well we worked, went to school, my mother had coffee cranesions with them, they're free and i mean, no, not either political world, i'm sure, the bay of meister, they all knew, but all that i'm sure. by the end of the war they knew though, didn't they? oh yeah, they knew dan, they knew dan all the year. but when you were taken away you don't think people knew what was happening? not the neighbors there, but the big shots, yes. yeah, not the neighbors. not those neighbors. were you the first people from your town to be taken away? only one, only one. the winner of jews in your town that were taken away? were there any jews in your town? we were the only ones. were there jews in your town when you were growing up? there wasn't any, i told you it was a little bit of a, now it's a big city, but it was just a little bit of a home town. tell me again how many people? about 900 those days. now i think they got a few thousand in that, i mean they got a little factory scone in there now and they merged, built, you know what i mean? not other little things go on there. so that's pretty good. i think that worked out pretty good as far as that was concerned. no, they didn't know. they didn't know. we were good, fly still, good friends with every one of them. of course a lot of them passed away the old folks, you know. every religious reminisce about our parents how good they were and what they did in this and that. and i'll tell you, i hope from all this, and i'm so glad this interview is that because things are really looking, they're looking too good with the skinheads and all that stuff, that this somehow, somewhere will help the discouraged someone to get all this stuff going again. that never, never, never, never should happen. never again this should happen to anyone, any jewish, religion people, polish, but i don't care to the human race, not a one. and no organization, no government of anywhere in this world should allow that, they should be totally, shouldn't even allow the skinheads, even in fun. even in, but we didn't know, we all forced no better, they should never been allowed for anybody to get even that much a hand next to the situation that even was an idea that that could actually happen again. and it is not just this country, it's the whole world. it's absolutely true guys, fuck you, get travis and you're a ensemble. i hope everybody startsdining at you this week, i hope you enjoy a day what you got by me in this weekend and to the movies and to see what those skills you've created will you you