OK. Today is February 18, 1996. I'm interviewing Bluma Doman. Her maiden name is Sztorch. My name is Ralene Brasg. I'm conducting this interview in Johannesburg, South Africa in English. You look so good. The main thing, just-- My name is Ralene Brasg. I'm interviewing Bluma Doman. Her maiden name is Sztorch. Today is the 18th of February 1996. I'm conducting this interview in Johannesburg, South Africa in English. Say your name. My name-- And I'm running-- My name-- No, no, no. You don't do anything. Not yet. You must only listen to me. I'm running, ready. What is your full name? Bluma Doman. Can you spell it? Bluma, B-L-U-M-A. Doman, D-O-M-A-N. What was you name at birth? Sztorch, S-Z-T-O-R-C-H. Did you have any other names? No, never. Did you have any other surnames? No. Was your name ever changed? No. Yes, it was changed in America because originally our name was Domankiewicz. When we became citizens of the United States, we shortened it to Doman. Can you spell Domankiewicz? D-O-M-A-N-K-I-E-W-I-C-Z. When were you born? At the 20th of-- no, the 8th of January, 1920. What is your age now? 76. 86. Hmm? Where were you born? In Poland. In a small city named Ozokiwicz. Can you spell that for me? O-Z-- a little help here. O-Z-O-K-I-W-I-C-Z. Ozokiwicz. Ozokiwicz. Do you remember your address? Yes. 29th in Ozokiwicz. What were your parents' names? My mother's name was Beila. My father's name was Moshe. Did you have any brothers or sisters? Yes, I did. Two with-- we were in a family of four children, two brothers and two sisters. What were your brothers' names? The brother's name is Arieh. He lives in Los Angeles. And my sister-- I have a sister, lives in Los Angeles, Helen. And one little brother perished in 19-- before we went in to ghetto, he die. They took him away. He was eight years old. Can you tell me how your parents earned a living? A very nice living. My father was a very good tailor, the best in the city. And we lived a very nice life in Poland. How did he earn his money? He had a tailor shop. He was a tailor. The shop making sewing for-- for the light from the all the light in-- in Ozokiwicz they were my father's customers. We had a nice shop. My father was-- So what else? And your mother? My mother was a housewife. She-- her maiden name is-- was Moskowiecz, a very good-looking lady. And so was my father. They were very devoted couple and very devoted parents. Like I said, my father made a very good living. He was a councilman in Ozokiwicz in city hall. All the light from this Ozokiwicz were my father's customers, the best tailor in the city. My parents were very youthful, devoted to each other. When going to all places with other-- was just something to dance or to play, we always there. And my mother was a very good cook, a baker. And above all, the best mother and clean. Our house was so clean we could eat from the floor. Everybody knew. My mother was taller than my father. So they called her, in Ozokiwicz, the tall Beila. Did they belong to any organizations? Oh, yes. My father was a councilman, honorary, in the city hall. Then he-- he was-- he formed-- he loved music so he formed a band from all Jewish boys. And every Sunday, they worked in the alley and-- and the avenues, And they played the Jewish-- you know, music, orchestra. My father was president of this organization. And he found that when they played every Sunday, my father right in front with white shoes, white pants, and a navy alpaca jacket. He was very sharp dresser. The orchestra had only hat. They didn't have any uniform, just hats. So was my father. They loved to dance. They loved to go places. And when I got older, they took me along. My father belonged to all He was running the labor-- the labor union from the tailors. And there were meetings in our house. We lived in a very beautiful flat. And my father has a shop there. I would go-- when in Poland you will start going to school seven-- seven years. Can you tell me about your grandparents? Yes. My mother's parents, my mother did hardly knew. But my-- my father, I remember very distinctly my grandparents, because every Pesach, my mother baked cakes. They lived nearby, a city called Leczyca. Today it was again a university city. All the higher school and elementary students were attending in Leczyca. My father used to take me to my grandparents. Every Pesach, my mother baked a lots of cakes and I went home with my father. I don't think that my sister and brother remember them. But I was the oldest, and it stuck in my mind. My grandfather owned a fishing shop. When I knew him, he was already retired. I eat with a with a Yiddish you know, with the- And when I came, there was-- I was the life of the party. My zayde, my father's father, was davening for the prisoners. Leczyca was the prison. Ozokiwicz didn't have a prison. So when there were fugitives, they were sitting in Leczyca. This was an hour drive nearby. Can you spell? What? Leczyca. Leczyca. No. And I went home always with my father on a train. The train was going so low-- so slow that you could walk quicker. But we went home. And my zayde was davening for the fugitives in the jail. Every Shabbos and every holiday he went over there to daven with the Jewish boys. They were not killers. Just for maybe tax evasion or maybe they stole something. Crime in Poland was very, very low, very low. And I-- after I visited my grandparents we went home. You want me to say about my childhood? I was seven years old. I started first grade. That's the mandatory-- no-- age to come to school. You have seven grades. To 14-- 14 years old, you come out from school. What was the name of your school? Shapscewicz. It was in a big private building. Shapscewicz. S-H-A-P-S-C-E-W-I-C-Z. Shapscewicz. There wasn't a first class school. In fact, when I finished, the school was moved. They moved. There were two schools only, one for boys, one for the girls. They-- they-- there was no girl, you're a boy-- Everybody went to the same school. A public school? A public school. When you finished at 14, you observe a lot-- a lot in that school. We took biology, geography, math, compositions, history, and even Jewish history too. It's not too close to the war. But we had-- we didn't-- we only knew Jewish history. Learning to daven and to write Yiddish, read a Yiddish paper was very common. And also we have a Jewish paper. And-- so-- So when I finished school I was 14 years old at seven grade. A lot of observing. I was very good in school. Whenever I wrote a composition and the teacher brought it back, I had always a five. And I had to stand in front of the school and read it, what I wrote. I was very good in singing. Yeah, we had singing too. And the Jewish, we learn only history the last years. But if I wanted to know how to daven-- and to say you know-- I had to-- we went to a private tutor and-- twice a week. And it was private. We talk and speak Yiddish. I-- I write Yiddish. I read a Jewish paper. And I can daven. From school we learned only history. It was a beautiful-- I had a beautiful childhood. My parents were very nice. We've been dressed always nicely. All of us. It was a nice living. But then when I become-- when I was 14 years old, I was one year at home, my mother brought me to a cousin of mines and she-- for apprentice of dressmaking. The most respected profession was for a girl to be a dressmaker. Or an embroider, you know, embroidering things-- everything. So I learned to my cousin. I was one year as apprentice. And after one year, I got $5-- five zlotys, a week, which was a fortune. I-- my father always used to say, money is old, spend it. Don't let money get old, spend it. $5. But I learned really quick when the war broke out I was still a young girl. And my father, that's what I want to tell you, my father had a beautiful tailor shop. And after the war, when they war-- we were-- we were-- five days after the war broke out-- Are you able to describe your home? Yes. We lived two beautiful rooms and a kitchen. My father had a shop right in-- in you coming into the kitchen. And it was beautiful. Our floors were red, shining. My mother was always cleaning. When I got older, I was helping her because it was too much. I saw how much she worked. The boys went home from the day's work, you know, which they're working the shop. And then my mother start to clean the shop. They came in the morning, everything was white, clean. They say what did you do? In-- in a few minutes, everything going to be dirty again. So she said, but to my satisfaction, I know it's clean. My mother was very clean. Did you have any pets? What? Did you have any pets? Yes, we had a dog, and we had a canary. I father adored canaries. He always tell them, play, sing, they sang. A beautiful, beautiful cage. Nobody could clean that cage. Only my father. And we have a dog, His name was What sort of dog was it? Like a fox terrier, something like this. And my mother had a very large family. There were seven kids, five daughters and two sons. Only one sister lives in England, which I have a picture of her. The rest, everybody lived in Ozokiwicz, uncles, tante-- aunties, cousins. It-- it was a pleasure, you know? Cousins my age, cousins older than my age. But it was just a pleasure to have all the family on Shabbos. Everybody comes to each other. So-- Can you tell me about your mother's sisters-- The sisters-- --brothers? --they were all housewives. All my uncles were with little Everybody very religious, Orthodox. My aunties wore wigs. And very religious. Poland as a whole had a lot-- a lot of Jewish people which were very religious. In fact, when they went in Ozokiwicz a lot of went home and got heart attacks and died. Who was the rabbi of the shul? Rabbi Ber, Ber, B-E-R. Where did you learn Hebrew and-- I don't speak any-- --Jewish studies? I don't speak any Hebrew. I speak German. I speak Polish. I speak Yiddish. And I speak English. At home, we spoke-- between the parents we talk Yiddish. And between us children, Polish. That was our livelihood. Did you go to a cheder? I'm telling you twice a week to a private tutor, and he taught us. So was my sister. My brother went to cheder, and the little one, which perished 8 years old. Do you remember the tutor's name? Who? Yeah, Mr. I-- I-- the long beard that has only one son. And-- we were going there after school twice a week because it was too much. And Poland has very severe winters. Some winters you cannot even step out from the house. They-- they have four seasons. Summer it was hot, scorching. If-- if-- you know, the spring was nice. Then the fall-- the leaves start falling. And in the winter time, a lot of times you couldn't step out from your house. So much snow, so much ice. The days in the winter time are very short. 3 o'clock in the afternoon, when you will go home from school, especially Hanukkah time, there was already dark. Not pitch dark but start to getting dark. It was a beautiful life. Did you have any special cousins? Yeah, all of them. In fact, one of my cousins, we met in Auschwitz. She went and I went left. She went to the side to the gas chamber. What was here name? Yes. She was maybe three years older than I. Did you have any special friends at school? Oh, yes. We-- it was a small city. Population only 32,000. There were-- I say they were more Yidden than Poles, but my sister, we talked in Israel. She said no. But there were a lot of Volksdeutsche. You know they-- they call it the Reichsdeutsche means the one which is born in Germany. And the Volksdeutsche is the one which lived all over Poland and other countries. And we had a lot-- a lot of Volksdeutsche. Before the war we knew the Germans. But you didn't know because they were Poles. But when the war broke out, every German was a German. To hit the was a mitzvah. The war broke out, I'll never forget, in 1939 on a Friday morning. I was staying and shaking the rugs on our balcony. A lady, a neighbor, comes running. That means, in Yiddish, war. That's Friday. The next Friday the Germans were at our steps. The Germans were staying where I lived was the main street, And the Germans were staying already with their jeeps and their half town is shaving themselves. In the end, not on the road, just in the-- on the-- on the boulevard. And I had the little brother eight years old and the little cousin. They both went out, and they looked at the soldiers how they dress and how they-- they washing themselves. It was September. It wasn't still so cold. One soldier said to the kids, That means if you are a you go like that. And the little boys came home. And my auntie and my mother, they said-- ah, they said, don't-- don't talk about it. This was Did you experience any other forms of anti-Semitism when you were at school? No, at school, the last years started Poland anti-Semitic. They had, before Jewish shops, they had a-- they been walking with-- with signs, don't buy from a Jew. And school started really rough because on Saturday, we didn't go to school the Jewish girls. So we needed a lesson to have on Shabbos when they're going home from school. They start playing dirty. They didn't want to give us the assignment. But my mother said to me, there is no such thing. Bribe them. Bribe them. So we stayed before the school with a piece of cake from Shabbos. And they gave us the assignment. They gave maybe to two Jewish girls. Then we passed on and we made the lessons. Yes, that's with the-- Ozokiwicz was a very nice city. It was a textile city. Did your parents or family experience anti-Semitism? No. Not-- not-- not yet. But maybe it would be a little bit longer we would. No, not yet. The only thing was that they didn't-- the school was something which we had to do. But when I finished school in that Shapscewicz building, they had built a beautiful new school for girls with all facilities, you know, inside plumbing. I was the last, we were the last ones to-- to evacuate that school. And-- but I didn't go to the school. My sister did. How did your father react to the Jews being forbidden to keep their shops open? My father on Shabbos, no Jew had opened up the shop on Shabbos. No, when-- when they were saying you should not keep your shops open during the week? Oh, they were saying with signs, don't buy from a Jew. And a lot of Poles believed that and they did. And a lot of them didn't. See. What was the relationship like between the Gentiles and the Jews? 90% of my father's customers were-- were Poles. We didn't feel it. Not yet. But maybe a few years later, Poland would be anti-Semitic enough. Did you have any non-Jewish friends? No. We-- Ozokiwicz was a small city. And now I'm coming to my teenage years. When I finish school, we-- we had-- we belonged to an organization called This was a strictly Jewish organization. It had a very beautiful big home. We congregate in the evenings and Shabbos. And every Shabbos night there was a orchestra and there were dances. I was to every one of them, I can tell you. And it was beautiful. I-- we-- everybody knew everybody. It was a small city. When-- on Shabbos, we got together, a bunch of teenagers. We walked to a forest. It was a forest not far, but it was pretty far to walk. But we didn't even realize that we are coming-- that we walk. We sang, we tell jokes. Boys and girls together. We came in to the forest. We sat down. And we sang up a storm. It was a beautiful primitive life. We didn't have any washing machine. We didn't have any vacuums. Didn't have any--