today is february 18th, 1996. i am interviewing blummer dohman, her maiden name is storch. my name is raylene bresk. i'm conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. my name is raylene bresk. i'm interviewing blummer dohman. her maiden name is storch. today is the 18th of february 1996. i'm conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. my name is rani. my name is rani. i need a sentence. what is your full name? blummer dohman. can you spell it? blummer v-l-u-m-a, dohman d-o-m-a-n. what was your name at birth? a bitch, storch. a set. t-o-r-c-h. did you have any other names? no, never. did you have any other surnames? no. was your name ever changed? no. yes, it was changed in america because originally our name was dohman kevich. when we became citizens of the united states, we shortened it to dohman. can you spell dohman kevich? d-o-m-a-n-k-i-e-w-s-i-c-z. when were you born? at the 28th of january, 1920. what is your age now? 76. 86. where were you born? in poland, in a small city named ozarkov. can you spell that for me? oz, oz-r-k-i-w-i-c-z. ozarkov. ozarkov. do you remember your address? yes, 29th, alayipusz kegel in ozarkov. what were your parents' names? my mother's name was bela. my father's name was moshe. did you have any brothers or sisters? yes, i did. we were in a family of four children, two brothers and two sisters. what were your brothers' names? the brother's name is arya. he lives in los angeles. my sister, her sister, lives in los angeles, helen. one little brother perished in 19th. before we went in together, he took a word. he was 80 years old. can you tell me how your parents earned a living? a very nice living. my father was a very good tailor, the best in the city. we lived a very nice life in poland. how did he earn his money? he was a tailor shop. a shop making so and for all the light in ozarkov. they were my father's customers. we had a nice shop. my father was... so what else? angel maga. my mother was a housewife. she made her name was moshe. was moskovitch, a very good looking lady. and so was my father. so a very devoted couple and very devoted parents. like i said, my father made a very good living. he was a councilman in ozarkov, ozarkov, in city hall. all the light from this ozarkov were my father's customers. the best tailor in the city. my parents were very youthful, devoted to each other. we were going to all places where it was just something to dance or to play. we always been there. and my mother was a very good cook. i bake it. and above all, the best mother. and clean. my husband was so clean, we could eat from the floor. everybody knew. my mother was so is my father. they called him in ozarkov, the tall baylor. did they belong to any organiser? oh, yes. and how my father was a councilman, anarari in the city hall. then he was informed, he loved music, so he formed a band from all jewish boys. and every sunday they walked in the avenues, pilsa skegel, and they played the jewish music orchestra. my father was the president of this organization. and he founded, when they played every sunday, my father, right in front with white shoes, white pants, and a navy alpaca jacket. it was very sharp, yes, the orchestra had only had. they didn't have any uniform, just had, so was my father. they loved to dance, they have to go places. and when i go all there, they took me along. my father belonged to all the ladies. he was running the labor union from the terrace. and there were meetings in our hearts. we lived in a very beautiful place. and my father has a shop there. i've been going in poland, you start going to school seven years. can you tell me about your grandparents? yes. my mother's parents, my mother did haldinu. but my father, i remember very distinctly my grandparents, because every piece of my mother baked cakes, they lived nearby a city called lancica. today was, again, a university city. all the higher school and elementary students were attending in lunches. my father used to take me to my grandparents. every piece of my mother baked lots of cakes, and i went home with my father. i don't think that my sister and brother remembered him, but i was the oldest, and he stuck in my mind. my grandfather owned a fish shop. when i knew him, he was a red retired. i eat with the lancata, with the shittles, with the infronted. and when i came, it was the life of the party. my father's father was devining for the prisoners, the lynches for the prisoners. also, the other couple didn't have a prison. so when they were fugitives, they were sitting in lunches. so now we're right nearby. can you tell? what? the lynches. and i went home always with my father. and our train, the train was going so slow, that you could work quicker. but we went home. my say there was devining for the fugitives in the jail. and every holiday, we went over there to meet the jewish boys. they were not killers. just for the maybe texting evasion or maybe they stole something. it was crime in poland for very, very low. and after i visited my grandparents, we went home. we went to say about my childhood. i was seven years old. i started first grade. that's mandatory age to come to school. you have seven grades, 14 years old, you come out from school. what was the name of the school? shabzevich. for the big private building. shabzevich. s-a-a-p-s-e-w-i-c-c. shabzevich. it wasn't our first class school. in fact, when i finished, the school was moved. they moved. there were two schools only. one for boys, one for girls. there was no one. i was a girl. everybody went to the same school. a public school. a public school. when you finish at 14, you observe a lot in that school. we took biology, geography, met, compositions, history, and even jewish history too. it was not too close to the world. we only knew jewish history. the learning to love them and to write the edition. the edition paper was very common in the other country. when i finished school, i was 14 years old, had seven grades, a lot of observing. i was very good in school. whenever i looked at the composition, the teacher brought it back. i had always a fight. i had to stay in front of the school and read it what i wrote. i was very good in singing. we had singing too. the jewish, we learned only history the last year. if i wanted to know how to dance, as i said, i had to apply this to the teacher. twice a week. there was private. i thought i'd speak jewish. i write jewish paper. i can dance. from the school, we learned only history. it was a beautiful, i had a beautiful childhood. my parents were very nice. we'd been dressed always nicely, all of us. it was a nice living. then, when i was 14 years old, i was one year at home. my mother brought me a cousin of mine. she, for a pinterest of test-making, the most expected profession was for a guilt to be a test-maker. all i am buried. you know, i am buried in things, everything. so i went to my cousin. i was one year as a pinterest. and after one year, i got five dollars, five lates a week, which was a fortune. my father was used to say, money's old, spend it. don't let money get old, spend it. five dollars. but i learned really quick. in the world workout, i was still a young girl. and my father, that's what i want to tell you. my father had a beautiful tailorshop. and after the world, when the world, we'd been five days after the world workout. are you able to describe your home? yes. we lived two beautiful rooms in the kitchen. my father had a shop right in and coming in to the kitchen. and it's beautiful. our floors were red shining. my mother was always cleaning. and i got older. i was helping her because it was too much. i saw how much you were. the boys went home from today's work, which they were working shop. and then my mother started cleaning the shop. they came in the morning. everything was white, clean. they said, what did you do? in a few minutes, everything's going to be dirty again. so she said, but to my satisfaction, i know it's clean. my mother was very clean. did you have any pets? but did you have any pets? yes, we had a dog. and we had a canary. my father, a dog canary. he's always telling me to play, sing, they sing, a beautiful, beautiful cage. nobody could clean that cage only my father. i mean, i have a dog, brillish, snvers brillish. what sort of dog was it? i like a fox tarry or something like this. my mother had a very large family. there were seven kids, five daughters and two sons. only one sister lived in england, which i have the picture of. there is everybody living in osaka. uncle's, time is a auntie. cousin's, it was a pleasure, you know? cousin's my age, cousin's older my age. but it was just a pleasure to have all the family and chabbies. everybody comes to each other. so? can you tell me about your mother's sisters? this is this. they were all the housewives. all my uncles were lanka patties with little hair to live. everybody, very religious, orthodox, my aunties' work, wigs. and very religious. poland as a whole had a lot of jewish people, which were very religious. in fact, when they went, i was soon in osaka. a lot of fumeedan went home and got the heart attacks and died. yes. what's the repar of me? it's not about bad. bad. p-e-r. where did you learn hebrew? i don't speak any hebrew. i speak german. i speak polish. i speak english. i speak english. at home, we spoke between the parents, we talked to the others, and between us children, polish. that's first our livelihood. then did you grab the heida? i'm telling you twice a week to a private tutor. and he taught us, so was my sister. my brother went to heida. and the little one which perished eight years ago. do you remember the tutor's name? who? yeah, mr. ehrliff. i... poor eida... the long beard, there had only one son. we were going there after school twice a week because it was too much, and poland has very severe winters. some winters you cannot even step out from the house. they have four seasons. some of us had sculpting a fifties. the spring was nice. then the fall, the leaves start falling. and in the wintertime, a lot of times, you couldn't set back on your house. so much snow, so much as. these days in the wintertime are very short, three o'clock in the afternoon, when you were going home from school, especially hanukkah time. they were already dark, not pitch dark, but start to getting dark. this was a beautiful life. did you have any special cousins? yeah, all of them. in fact, one of my cousins, we met in auschwitz. she went, links, and i went rest. she went to the side of the question. what was her name? figer, fella, figer. yes, she was maybe two years older than i. did you have any special friends at school? oh, yes, it was a small city. population only 32,000. i said they were more giddens than poles, but my sister, we talked in israel. she said no. but they were a lot of folkstarch. you know, the colon, the reichstarch, means the one which is born in germany. and the folkstarch is the one which lived in all of it. poland and other countries. and we had a lot, a lot of folkstarch. before the war, we knew the germans. but you didn't know because they were poles. but when the world broke out, every german was a german. to hit the heat was a misfer. to war broke out, i never forget, in 1939, on a friday morning, i was staying and shaking the rocks and i was balcony. a lady and a big comes running. mulchum, muh-muh-muh-muh. that means in yiddish war. no, that's friday. the next friday the germans were tower steps. the germans were staying and they were well lived for the main street, a layupian skag. and the germans were staying already with the jeeps and the shirts half down, they're shaving themselves. in the, not in the road, just in the, in the, in the, in the will of that. and i had a little, well, the eight years old and a little cousin. they both went out and they looked at the soldiers, how they dress and how they, they washing themselves for september. it wasn't still so cold. and one soldier said to the kids, first you did against yourself. that means if you were a yidd, you go like that. and the little boys came home and my auntie and my mother, they thought, oh, he said don't, don't talk about it. this was a curve. did you experience any other forms of anti-semitism when you were at school? no, at school, the last years started for the anti-semitic. they had, before jewish shops, they had a, they've been walking with signs done by from a jew. and the school started really rough because on saturday we didn't go to school, the jewish girls. so we needed to listen to heaven, shabbos, when they go in and come from school. they start playing dirty, they didn't want to give us the assignment. but my mother said to me, there is no such thing. bribe them. bribe them. so we stayed before the school with a piece of cake from shabbos and they gave us the assignment. they gave me the two jewish girls. then we passed on and we made a lesson. yeah, that's what they were doing. as a cover, it was a very nice city, with a textile city. people. parents, family experience anti-semitism? no, not yet. but maybe it would be a little bit longer with we would. no, not yet. the only thing was that the school was something which we had to do. but when i finished school in that shabbos building, they had built a beautiful new school for girls, with all facilities inside plumbing. i was the last, even the last ones, to evacuate that school. and i didn't go to the white school. my sister did. how did your father react to jews being forbidden to keep their shops open? my father, and shabbos, known to have had opened up the shop and shabbos. no, when they were saying you should not keep your shops open during the week. oh, they were saying with signs done by from a jew. and a lot of falls believed it, and they did. and a lot of them didn't. same. what was the relationship like between the gentiles and the jews? 90% of my father's customers were poles. we didn't feel it, not yet. but maybe a few years later, the following would be unto submitting enough. did you have any non-jewish friends? no. we also covered a small city. and now i'm coming to my teenage years. when i finished school, we had a long-term conversation called my cowboy. this was a strictly jewish organization. we had a very beautiful, big home. we can't get in the evenings and shabbos. and every shabbos night, there was an orchestra, and they were dancers. i watched everyone that can tell you. and it was beautiful. everybody knew everybody. it was a small city. when and shabbos, we got together a bunch of teenagers. we walked to a forest. it was a forest, not far. but it was pretty far to work. but we didn't even realize that we are coming. that we walk. we sang. we tell jokes, boys and girls together. we came in today. forest. we sat down. and we sang up a song. it was a beautiful, primitive life. we didn't have any washing machines. didn't have any vacuums. didn't have any vacuums. we didn't have any vacuums.