i'm conducting an interview with blumer doeman. today is the 18th of february 1996. the interview is being conducted in johannesburg, south africa in english, tape two. can you tell me about your religious lifestyle in orzhokov? there were 90% of the jews were very religious. like i told you, there were kapathists, there were their little heads. they've been going to shul three times a day, two times a day in the morning for the morning prayers. then the min'khamarev was a big thing. even hanukkah when we had every jewish holiday was a big event. that was the polish jewish life. like i say, if somebody wasn't from and he wanted to buy meat from another kosher butcher, he hid himself to go in to see. that's nobody sees him, but he's buying non-kosher. it was very religious. one incident i can tell you, on pesach, all the jewish bakeries were closed. the last day after pesach, one year, it wasn't very firm, he lit already the oven to bake for next day for bread because people after pesach were running like to bread. as the people, the firm people saw the smoke going from the chimney, they went into the rabbi and the rabbi went there and he made a big, big thing about it. this was the jewish, that's why you know the jews lived a very, very orthodox life. my father was a cohen. he was going to all the pitting events in the city. a lot of times i went along with him. it was very nice to see it. and life was in general very beautiful in a primitive country. then the eden, like i say, every jewish was elitist. if you watch the film, hitler on the roof, you can describe exactly the polish eden in poland with the titties, with the little heads. nobody there would do something wrong about religion. shabbos friday night, the lechshentin closed all the shops, shabbos was shabbos. shabbos night, we went out, we had a good time, we were going to dances, all the teenagers. my father and mother, they were always undergo. they lived a really happy life. was it easy to come across kosher meat? no. they were butchers and bakers. my mother was a baker's daughter and all her relatives in ozyk贸w had a jewish bakery. the jewish put in, no. all jewish, no problem. poultry, when you bought, you had to bring to shechte and you had to clean it yourself and cozier yourself. if sometimes you make a mistake, i saw my mother doing, she used a knife for something, was for meat, and she used a knife for something else. by mistake, she took the knife, put it in the ground, and stayed in the ground a few, twenty-four hours, then the knife was kosher again. to this extent, that's every year was a year. see, all polish jews were very religious. i think the most orthodoxy you found in poland and in the big cities, sure, was something nice, see. was it easy to get religious articles? no, no. they had a jewish paper, wasn't printed in ozyk贸w, it was printed in lodz, but every day, even my father without a jewish paper, had to have a jewish paper. and another thing, my father loved music, loved life. there were maybe ten radios in the whole of ozyk贸w before the war. who had a radio? moshe star. i swear to you, the day they installed our radio, they put in a big aerial on the roof, and the same evening, the whole neighborhood was staying to listen to moshe star. there were maybe ten radios in the whole city, no cars, only one taxi. there was no hospital in ozyk贸w when you took sick, or you go to lencica, or you go to lodz. lodz had a big hospital. mostly maternity women went to have their children in lodz, in hospital, because in our city, a lot, a lot of women died at childhood. a lot, a lot. from where did you get your talazim, zidorim, to fill in? there was a jewish store. my father had a talus, a big talus. he had to fill in. and my brothers didn't live to the day, my youngest little brother was taken away when he was eight years old. he didn't have a talus yet. and this one, the one is, was twelve years old. the one was alive. he didn't live long enough to have the, we didn't live long enough in poland. that's my brother had the bar mitzvah, because when the war broke out, he was twelve years old. and thank god i have this brother. we was the bar mitzvah? there wasn't any bar mitzvah. he was twelve years old in dornich after he was in auschwitz. what was the bar mitzvah like in oshakov? not as fancy as you do in here. mostly you went to shul, you made a kiddush, you know, and the boy read it. and that's it. you make parties, weddings, weddings, yes, this was a big event. but they were dances. every shabbos night, we went to dances. and we enjoyed life. you can see my parents. when did you start feeling that trouble was looming and going to affect your family? we didn't hear as much. who read hitler's mein kampf knew what's going to, when he wrote this in jail in austria. you know this, the book mein kampf. who read this book knew what's going to happen to the eden. but we didn't realize it's just around the corner. i remember one shabbos, everybody was out and having a good time. they say hitler is going to invade czechoslovakia because he wants sudetenland from czechoslovakia, which belonged once to germany. he wanted this. he gave them ultimatum and the czechs didn't have no choice. they gave them back sudetenland. six months later, he said to poland, he wants a olya. this was a town near the german border. he wants a olya. the poles said they will not give him. but for some reason, six months later, they gave back to hitler the olya. as they gave him back, he said, ich habe mein kainen verlange. that means i have no saying that i want more land. that's what i wanted, sudetenland and the olya. six months later, the war broke out. a lot of politicians talked about, i remember my father used to be also the head of the union, of taylor's union in azarkov. and they used to have meetings. when they come for the meetings, they've been discussing politics too. and a lot of people said, see, hitler will attack poland. so the poles were too stupid to realize because just before maybe six months before the war, there was in the senate, was a lady named prista rova. she gave a project into the senate that the yidin are not supposed to cut their cows. they supposed to shoot them. it's unhumane. it's unhumane to cut the throat from the cows. and this was going on. that we start feeling the antisemitism in poland. this was going on for months and months. by the time hitler, they were thinking about the jews, about their meat and hitler meanwhile looked into poland. six months later, the war broke out. how did that affect your family? everybody didn't come down to the, that's, it was law, you see. didn't come down to law that they have to shoot the animals, not to. but they, the goyim, when they shotting a chaser, a pig, first they pouring over hot water off the pig and then they shot me. this was humane to, to the prista rova. madame prista rova. i believe she must have been a folk star. so, you know, everybody was heartbroken. we not feeling a little bit, but not as much as we would maybe in two, three years later. poland will come, will become very antisemitic. when did you have to start closing your shops and leaving the house? no, we had, we had the shops till the war started. they were regular shops. my father had a lot of customers, regular shop. only that black friday when the war broke out. my father had lots of materials, you know, because when somebody wanted a suit, my father showed him a sample and then he bought the material and made a suit. and we, as customers, we didn't feel yet. that is going to start very much antisemitism. my father had a lot of folk storage customers in north america. and as the war broke out, my father was a german. before the war, you didn't even realize that they are germans. going to polish school, they had a church, they had a german church. and the boys, everybody, my father had the best customers. he had a customer, karl mowit. they were two brothers. one was janik mowit, one was karl mowit. they had two sons, my father, for all of them was some. karl, he was a baker. he had a potpelly like this. nobody in the city could make a suit for karl mowit, karl mowit, my father made. in the war, he came to my father's shop. my father made him two suits. he shook my father. my father was small, not tall. he said, i nesha'ed it as to you, the beast, with tiny hands. it's just so sally that you are a jew with your hands what you can do. and he was our customer. and i just said to my son today, as anti-semitic maybe they were, my father made them in the beginning of the war, two suits. and he didn't, a lot of germans just took it and didn't pay. he said to my father, you take out in bakery goods. he had a bakery. it didn't work. it was a rich german. he said to my father, you send every day your daughter or your son for bakery goods and you'll have it. i used to go every morning to bring from karl mowit. and his brother was also foxtrot. he met my father and he said, go to the fields till you arrive to my house and i'll give you some. that time we start easing and caution. but my mother, you could kill her. she said, i'd rather die than i should eat hazard. she didn't eat. absolutely not. then the war broke out, 1939, september 1st. i never forget i was staying and shaking our rugs on the balcony. a lady and neighbors come running. mokoma, mokoma, boy, war, war. it's just, you know, little things, but you remember. we had that beautiful cage with that canary. and my father's, it was his pleasure. and that shabbos, when the war broke out friday, was still quiet in poland. we went out and my father always used to close all the windows and all the doors from the house and let that bird out to run around, to have some exercise. as we came back then, shabbos from home, matrzy was gone. why? my father forgot to close the door from the balcony. matrzy was gone. so the cage was still staying and we had customers, like i said, folks, one young fellow named karl past. i came up, karl past our flat and he demand the radio and the bed cage and the bed. but the bed wasn't alive, it was gone. so he took this. my father said to him, karl, was machst du? he didn't have an answer. he went, he took it. and his father was a very good customer of ours. but the youth turned right away to be a german. put on their uniforms, a gestapo uniform and beating the eden. then we come again to ozarkov and the germans took over ozarkov after six days. they came in. three days later, they burned the shoe. and a little bit later, we had to get off the main street. what did they do with the shoe? they burned it to the ground. told you. they, a lot of feeling. went home and we got heart attacks and died. you're the older from eden. so they chased us off the main street. we lived in the main street. we had to move out from our apartment. we went to our cousin who actually she let us in. we've been stuffed like herrings. my father had stilled the shop. he was working. made money. a lot of him paid. not much, but he paid. we had all the reichsturges from germany, you know. the mayor was a german from the state, not a polish jew, not a polish german. and my father, one day they walked into our house with a horse, his wife on a horse. my father made a suit for his wife and he made them for christmas. when he went home, my father made them a whole wardrobe. he came back. he didn't have any words what to say. he also said, i'm sorry that you are a jew with your hands. so we lived with our cousins maybe two months. this was still 1939. then one day they announcing the jews going into ozykov ghetto. but till we got into the ghetto, first they took us to the white school like my sons just said, to the white school. they addressed us to nothing and they abandoned us. no, first they took us to a hanging. they hang eight jewish boys, two brothers between them. and from the hanging they took us to the white school. in the white school they blended us a and b. my little brother had an a and we had obs. okay. and then they chased us into the ghetto. who was with you? my parents, everybody, naked, stuck naked, we all stayed together. they blended us and then they sent us home. we went home a few days. they made a generalco so that this time they took my little brother. he was eight years old and i had a cousin, a turkish, where my father had a shop in their house till the ghetto. and her and two little children, a little boy and a little girl, they all went. my mother wasn't beside herself. her life had ended while they took her little baby. so now we are in ozykov ghetto. we're going out every day out of the ghetto by guards to work. so they gave again my father a shop and was sewn again for the germans. and there were other shops too, not just my father. and they were desk making. the germans came like no paradise. they took them in in a big building. the sewing machines, the mirrors, everything they took to the shop. and they came over there for having things done. the ladies were desk making, everything. which streets were included in the ozykov ghetto? there was a section, a new section developed, which lived only poles because aide didn't live there. because aide needed a shoe, needed kashrut, and they wouldn't live there. but the poles made up a hill. i don't even remember where it was. they chased out the poles. there were little single dwellings. and in one dwelling there were three families the germans put in. us, another man, and another lady. three rooms, each room one family. how many people all together? there wasn't much left of the eden, the elder eden didn't come in together. like when they hanged those people and they took us in to that white school, the half of the jewish population was taken already to the gas chamber. they didn't go to the gas chamber. they went to chelmno where one transport had to dig for the other one, the graves. first they dig for themselves and when they finished they dig the grave for the uncoming. and there was my little brother too. people were saying that they had been buried alive. how many people lived in the apartment with you? there was a couple with four children and a wife. we were three children. my little boy, my little brother was gone already. and only one single lady. in one little house they were, in one little house there were three families in one little house. so it wasn't enough for the people to get in. they built, you should see, some, some houses for the people. my cousin, she was between them, she got a flat in the new buildings. my father was a celebrity with the germans so they gave him a nice room, one room. and what street were you in? it was just developing. i really couldn't tell you about the street. i know where it was and every day we walked to the shops and saw. my mother never knew how to keep a needle in her hands because she was left handed. and everybody was a tailor in the house so my mother didn't know how to sew. so we had to go in order to get your ration. you had to work. if you didn't work you don't eat to get the ration. so we took our mother with us and she said, and we've been sewing for her, my sister and myself, and we made her production and she got every day of soap in other shops. it wasn't as bad in other shops as it came later because we went out and we had people which knew us brought to somebody something. somebody saw this and that. we lived. we were not hungry as we've been in the 30 times. we all went out to work and in the evening they took us back and the next morning the same thing. one thing we didn't work on sunday. shabbes we did. that's what the gym is for. shabbes, shabbes, shabbes.