i'm conducting an interview with blue madowman. today is the 18th of february 1996. the interview is being conducted in johannesburg, south africa, in english. take two. can you tell me about your religious lifestyle in autograph? there was 90% of the jews were very religious. like i told you, they work up for this, they work little hats. they've been going to shoot three times a day, the morning for the morning prayers. then they went from there was a big thing. even hanukkah, when we had every jewish holiday was a big event. that's first the polish jews life. like i say, if somebody wasn't from any one that would buy meat from another kosher woodchick, he hit himself to go in to see that nobody sees him, that he's buying, non-cocha food. it was very religious. one incident i can tell you, and pay stuff. all the jewish bakeries were close. the last day after pay stuff, one eat, he wasn't very firm. he lit already the oven to bake for the next day for bread, because people have to pay stuff. we're running like forget. as the people, the firm people saw the smoke going from the chimney. they went into the rabbi, and the rabbi went there and you made a big, big thing about it. this was a jewish, that's why you know. the jews lived a very, very odd-took life. my father was a coin. he was going to all a petan of ends in the city. a lot of times i went along with him. it was very nice to see it. life was in general very beautiful, in a primitive country. then it didn't, like i say, every jews' baza was it is. if you watch the film, fiddler and the roof, you can describe exactly the polish-giesen in poland, which it says to east with little heads. nobody's there would do something wrong about the little bit. shabbos friday night, the lexington, clothes, all the shops, shabbos, for shabbos night. we went out, we had a good time, we were going to dances, all the teenagers. my father, modern, they were always on the go. they lived a really happy life. it wasn't easy to come across the culture meet. no, they were witches, bakers. my mother was a baker stutter. in all, a relative in azkap, had a bakery, a jewish bakery. the jewish building, all the children, no problem. a polteries, when you bought, you had to bring to share it, and you had to clean it yourself and cozy yourself. if sometimes you make a mistake, i saw my mother, she used a knife for something, for some meat, and she used a knife for something else, for a mistake. she took the knife, put them in the ground, and stayed in the ground, a few 24 hours, then the knife was kosher again. to this extent, that's every eat was a eat. all poets chose for a very religious. i think that the most orthodox eating you found in poland, and in the wake said, it is, for something else. was it easy to get religious articles? no, he had a jewish paper, wasn't printing, azkap, was printing lunch, but every day, i even went to a father without a jewish paper, had to have a jewish paper. and another thing, my father loved music, loved life. they were maybe ten radios in a whole azkap before the world. who had that idea? massastarf. i swear to you, today they installed other radios. they put in a big, a real-landed roof. and the same evening, the whole neighborhood was saying to listen to moza's stuff, they were maybe ten radios in the whole city. no cars. only one taxi. there was no hospital in the azkap when he took sick or he got in chitsa or he got to lunch. had a big hospital. mostly, maternity women went to have their children in lunch in hospital, because in our city, a lot of women died a lot. from where did you get to, to the nice city of the room? there was a jewish store. my father had a tallest, big tall. he had to fill him. and my brothers didn't live today. my youngest little brother was taking away when he was 80 years old. he didn't have a tallest yet. and this one, the one is, it was 12 years old. the one is alive. he didn't live long enough to have the, we didn't live long enough in poland. that's my brother husband. it's because when the bro, guabrokat, he was 12 years old. and thank god i have this brother. we was the bormitzva. there wasn't anybody, it was 12 years old. in dourniques, after he was in auschwitz, what was the bormitzva? not the 20 years you're doing here. mostly you want to shoot. you made a kiddish, you know a brother and they bought it at the day. and that's it. you make parties, weddings, weddings, yes, to dispose of a big event. but they were dances. every shawl of his night, he went to dances. i mean, he enjoyed like, you can see my parents. when did you start feeling that trouble was looming and going to affect your women? we didn't, we didn't hear as much. who read hitler's mind come. new, what's going to be when europe is in, in jail in austria, you know this, the book mind come. who read this book? new, what's going to happen to the eden. but we didn't realize it's just around the corner. i remember one shabbis, everybody was out and having a good time. they say hitler is going to invade czechoslovakia because he won to that land from czechoslovakia, which belonged once to germany. he wanted to see, gave them ultimatum and the czechs didn't have no choice. they gave them back to that land. six months later, he is set to poland. he wants the ultimatum. he wants the ultimatum. the poles said they were not given. but for some reason, six months later, they gave back to hitler's ultimatum. as he gave him back, he said, he had been made kind of a longing. that means i have known a saying that i want more land. that's what i wanted. so that land and the ultimatum. six months later, to world rock up. a lot of politicians talked about it. i remember my father used to be also the head of the union, the italian, the italian union in azekov. they used to have meetings. when they come for the meetings, they were discussing politics too. a lot of the indians said, see hitler will attack poland. but the poles were too stupid to realize because just before maybe six months before the work, there was in the senate, for the lady named pristorova. she gave project into the senate that the eden are not supposed to cut their cows. they're supposed to shoot them. it's a new mane. it's a new mane to cut their throat from the cows. this was gone. that we start feeling the anti-symmitism in poland. this was gone for months and months by the time hitler was thinking about the jews to say, couldn't, about their meat, and hitler, meanwhile, looked in to poland. six months later, the world rock up as to what? i'm the ficge of family. everybody didn't come down to the, that's the first law, you see. they didn't come down the law that they should shoot their animals, not to. but they, the goyem, when they shurked in the hazard, i think, first they pulled in the hot water of the pig. and then they shurked me. this was humane to the pristorova. my damn pristorova. i believe she must have been our folkstarch. so, you know, everybody was heartbroken. we've started feeling a little bit, but not as much as we would, maybe in two or three years later, poland will come, they will come very anti-symmetric. when did you have to start closing shops? no, you had, we had the shops still to work, started. there were regular shops. my father had a lot of customers, regular shops, only that black friday when the war broke out. my father had lots of materials, you know, because when somebody wanted to shoot, my father showed them a sample, and then they put the material in the middle suit. and now, as customers, we didn't feel yet that's going to start very much anti-symmetric. my father had a lot of folkstarch customers in north africa. and as the war broke out, everybody was a gentleman. before the war, you didn't even realize, let's say, again, it's going to fall to school. they had a chance to have a gentleman to it. and the war is everybody, my father has the best customers. he has a customer, carl mowitt. they were two brothers. my husband was a young man, and his father was a cowboy. they had two sons. my father, for all of them, was a carl, he was a baker. he had a pack belly like this. nobody in this city could make a suit for carl mowitt. my father made it. in the war, he came to my father's shop. my father made him two suits. he shot my father. my father was small, not tall. he said, i need shard it as to you, the best, me tiny hen. it's just to study that you are a jew with your hands, what you can do. and he was our customer. and i just had to do my son today. as anti-symmetric, maybe there were, my father made him in the beginning of the war, two suits. and he didn't, a lot of germans just took it and didn't pay. he said to my father, you take out and bake a records. he had, he had a bakery, he didn't work. it was a rich german. he said to my father, you sent every day, your daughter, your son, for a bakery goods and your habits. i used to go every morning to bring carl mowitt in his brother, but also a folks that he met my father and he said, story, go to the fields, till you arrive to my house, and i'll give you some. that time, we start easing and coaching, but my mother, you could kill her. she said, i'd rather die as i should eat husband. she didn't eat absolutely nothing. then the war broke out, nineteen to ninety-nine september 1st. i never forget, i was staying and shaking our rocks on the balcony, a lady, a neighbor's come running. but my mother, my wife, it's just little things, but you remember, we had a beautiful cage with that canary. my father's pleasure, and that job is, when the war broke out friday, was still quiet and pulling, we went out and my father always used to close all the windows in all the doors from the house and let that bit out to run around, to trap some exercise. as we came back to the showbiz from home, march, years ago, why? my father forgot to close the door from the balcony, the balcony, the much is gone. so the cage was still staying, and we had customers, like i said, focused on one of the young fellows, named kampath. i came up, called pastor i was flat, and he remained the radio and the webpage and the webpage, but the person called i was gone. so he took this, my father said to him, carl, pastor, you didn't have an answer, he went, he took it. and his father was a very good customer, if i was back to you, it didn't have the way to being a german, put on their uniform, i'd get stopped for uniform and beating the eating. then we come again to azakov, and the germans took over, after six days, they came in, three days later they went to show, and a little bit later, we had to get off the main set. what did i do with the show? to bend it, to the ground, told you, there is a lot of feeling when home, and we got the objects in doubt, you're the other for me. so it changed us off the main set, we lived in the main set, we had to move out to my apartment, we went to a cousin, luckily she was testing, we've been stuffed like herrings, my father had still the shop, he was working, made money, a lot of them paid, not much but they paid, we had all the rice toast from germany, you know, the mayor was a german from the state, not the polish jew, not the polish a german, and my father, one day they walked in to our house with a horse, his wife had a horse, my father made a search for his wife, and he made them for christmas, when they went home, my father made them a whole world of, he came back, he didn't have any words what to say, he also said, i decided that you are a jew with your hands, so we lived at our cousins, maybe two months, this was still like until the night, then one day they announced it, the jews going into the other together, but till we got into the together, first they took us to the white school, like my son just said, to the white school, and there's this to nothing, and they landed us, now first they took us to a hanging, they hang eight musicians, two brothers were a little few men, and from the hanging they took us to the white school, in the white school they blended us, eight and b, my little brother had the eight, and we had all peace, okay, and then they chased us into the g who was with you, my parents, everybody naked, stuck naked, we all sat together, they blended us, and then they sent us home, we went home a few days, they made a gimme a roll call, so that this time they took my little brother, it was an eight years old, and i had a cousin, a type of son, my father had the shop, and their house till we get them, and had two little children, a little boy knows it was going, they all went, my mother wasn't beside herself, her life had ended, why they took her little baby, so now we are in the house, we go out every day, out of the ghetto by cards, to work, so they gave, again, my father a shop, and was sown again for the germans, and now there were other shops, still not just my father, and they were desmaking, the germans came like an paradise, they took them in in a big building, some machines, the mirrors, everything they took to the shop, and they came over there, for having tinks done till the ladies were desmaking, everything, which streets were included in the also coffee guitar, there was a section, a new section developed, which lived only poles, because i lived there, because i eat the shoe, need cash out, and they wouldn't live there, but the poles made up a hill, i don't even remember where it was, they chased out the poles, there were little single dwellings, and no, in one dwelling there were three family, the germans put in us, another men, another lady, three rooms, each room, one family, how many people all together? there wasn't much left of the eden, the eldery didn't come in together, when they hanged those people, and they took us into that white school, the half of the jewish population was taken already to the gas chamber, they didn't go to the gas chamber, they went to hellno, where one transport had to dig for the other one, the graves, first they dig for themselves, and when they finished they dig the grave for the uncommon, and there was my little brother too, people were saying that stephen buried a life. so this is the... i was a couple with four children and a wife, we were a little teacher, then my little boy, my little brother was gone already, and only one single lady, in one little house they were in one little house, they were a three families in one little house, so it wasn't enough for the people to get in, they build you should see some houses for the people, my cousin, she was between them, she got a flat in the new buildings, my father was a celebrity with the germans, so they gave him a nice room, one room, and well, that's what you did, it was just the developing, i really couldn't tell you about this, i know it was where it was, and every day we walked to the shops, and so my mother, it's never knew how to keep her needle in the hands, because she was left handed, and everybody was a tail in the house, so my mother didn't know how to show, so we had to go and order to get your ration, you had to work, if you didn't work, you don't eat to get the ration, so we took our mother with us, and she said, and we've been shown for her, my sister, myself, and we made her production, and she got every day of soap in azakot, it wasn't as bad in azakot as it came later, because we went out and we had people which knew us, brought to somebody, somebody, somebody saw this in that, we lived, we were not hungry, as we've been in the feta times, we all went out to work, and in the evening they took us back, and the next morning was changing, one thing we didn't want and sunday, shall be dead, that's what a gem is for.