beep beep beep beep beep today is february the 18th 1996 i am interviewing bluma doman her maiden name is storch my name is raylene brask i am conducting this interview in johannesburg south africa my name is raylene brask i am conducting this interview in johannesburg south africa my name is raylene brask i am interviewing bluma doman her maiden name is storch i am conducting this interview in johannesburg south africa in english my name my name what is your full name? doman bluma b-l-u-m-a doman d-o-m-a-n what was your name at birth? storch did you have any other names? no was your name ever changed? no, yes it was changed in america because originally our name was doman kiewicz when we became citizens of the united states we shortened it to doman can you spell doman kiewicz? d-o-n-a-n-k-i-e-w-s-i-c when were you born? the 28th of january 1920 what is your age now? 76 86 when were you born? in poland in a small city named ozarkow can you spell that for me? oz o-z-o-j-i-w-i-c-z ozarkow do you remember your address? yes, 29th in ozarkow what were your parents' names? my mother's name was bela, my father's name was moshe did you have any brothers or sisters? yes, i did we were in a family of four children, two brothers and two sisters what were your brothers' names? the brothers' name is aria, he lives in los angeles and my sister, i have a sister, lives in los angeles, helen and one little brother perished in 19 before we went in to ghetto he was eight years old can you tell me how your parents earned a living? a very nice living my father was a very good tailor, the best in the city and we lived a very nice life in poland how did he earn his money? he had a tailor shop, it was a tailor shop he was making sewing for all the light in ozarkow they were my father's customers i had a nice shop, my father was... and your mother? my mother was a housewife, her maiden name was moskowiec, a very good looking lady and so was my father, they were a very devoted couple and very devoted parents like i said, my father made a very good living he was a councilman in ozarkow, in city hall all the light from this ozarkow were my father's customers the best tailor in the city my parents were very youthful, devoted to each other we were going to all places but it was just something to dance or to play, we always been there and my mother was a very good cook, a baker and above all, the best mother and clean our house was so clean, we could eat from the floor everybody knew, my mother was so as in my father they called in the ozarkow, they told bela did they belong to any organization? oh yes, and how my father was a councilman, aunteri, in the city hall then he was... he loved music, so he formed a band from all jewish boys and every sunday they walked in the alley and the avenues, pieces together and they played the jewish music orchestra my father was the president of this organization and he formed it, when they played every sunday my father, writing for him, with white shoes, white pants and a navy alpaca jacket it was very sharp pressure, the orchestra had only heads they didn't have a uniform, just heads, so was my father they loved to dance, they loved to go places and when i got all there, they took me along my father belonged to all the reasons he was running the labor, the labor union from the terris and there were meetings in our house we lived in a very beautiful flat and my father has a sharp day when in poland, you start going to school seven years can you tell me about your grandparents? yes, my mother's parents, my mother did hardly knew but my father, i remember very distinctly my grandparents because every pizza, my mother baked cakes they lived nearby a city called l'anciza today it was again a university city all the higher school and elementary students were attending in lunches my father used to take me to my grandparents every pizza, my mother baked lots of cakes and i went home with my father i don't think that my sister and brother remember them but i was the oldest, and it stuck in my mind my grandfather owned a fishing shop when i knew him, he was already retired i eat with a long capacitor, with a little shuttle we'd go to the front today and when i came, it was the life of the party my father's father was governing for the prisoners the lunches for the prison ozokov didn't have a prison so when they were fugitives, they were sitting in lunches so now we're in the rise nearby and you still? what? lunches and i went home always with my father on a train, the train was going so slow so slow that you could work quite quickly but we went home my zeder was governing for the fugitives in the jail every shabbos, in every holiday, he went over there to davenwood, the jewish boys they were not killers just for maybe texting, evasion, or maybe they stole something it was crime in poland, was very, very low very low and after i visited my grandparents, we went home we went home we went to serve at my childhood i was seven years old i started first grade testimatory age to come to school you have seven grades to 14 years old, you come out from school what was the name of your school? shabzewicz first, a big private building shabzewicz s-a-p-s-c-e-w-i-c-z shabzewicz it wasn't a first-class school in fact, when i finished, the school was moved there were two schools only one for boys, one for girls there was no girl or a girl everybody went to the same school a public school a public school when you finished at 14, you observed a lot a lot in that school we took biology, geography, math, compositions, history and even jewish history too not too close to the world we only knew jewish history they learned to govern and to write the issue, read the issue, paper it was very common in the osgabt jewish paper so when i finished school, i was 14 years old had 7 grades a lot of observing i was very good in school whenever i wrote the composition, the teacher brought it back i had always a fight and i had to stand in front of the school and read it, what i wrote i was very good in singing we had singing too and the jews, we learned only history the last years but if i wanted to know how to govern as a serus chaddish we went to a private tutor and twice a week and it was private we taught to speak yiddish i write yiddish, i read the jewish paper and i can't govern and from the school, we learned only history it was beautiful i had a beautiful childhood my parents were very nice we had been dressed always nicely all of us it was a nice living but then when i was 14 years old i was one year at home my mother brought me to a cousin of mine and she was an apprentice of dressmaking the most expected profession was for a guild to be a dressmaker all i avoided you know, embroidery things, everything so i went to my cousin i was one year as apprentice and after one year, i got five dollars five zotties a week, which was a fortune my father used to say, money's old, spend it don't let the money get old, spend it five dollars but i learned really quick when the world broke out, i was still a young girl and my father, that's what i want to tell you my father had a beautiful tail shop and after the war, when the war, we've been five days after the world broke out are you able to describe your home? yes we lived two beautiful rooms in a kitchen my father had a shop right in and come again to the kitchen and it was beautiful our floors were red, shining my mother was always cleaning when i got older, i was helping her because it was too much, i saw how much you were the boys went home from today's work, you know, which they worked in the shop and then my mother started to clean the shop they came in the morning, everything was white, clean they said, what did you do? and in a few minutes, everything was going to be dirty again so she said, but to my satisfaction, i know it's clean my mother was very clean did you have any pets? did you have any pets? yes, we had a dog and we had a canary my father had got canaries he always tell them, play, sing they sang a beautiful, beautiful cage nobody could clean that cage, only my father and we had a dog, brillish, snaver's brillish what sort of dog was it? like a factory or something like this my mother had a very large family there were seven kids, five daughters and two sons only one sister lived in england, which i have a picture of her there is, everybody lived in oceacoke uncles, aunties, cousins it was a pleasure, you know cousins my age, cousins older my age but it was just a pleasure to have all the family and shabbos everybody comes to each other so... can you tell me about your mother's sisters? the sisters? they were all her housewives all my uncles were lanka-patters with little hair to life everybody very religious, orthodox my aunties were wigs and very religious poland as a whole had a lot of jewish people which were very religious in fact, when they burned our shoe in oceacoke a lot of them even went home and got heart attacks and died who was the rabbi of the... rabbi ber ber b-e-e-r where did you learn hebrew and jewish life? i don't speak any... i don't speak any hebrew i speak german i speak polish i speak yiddish and i speak english at home, we spoke between the parents, we talked yiddish and between us children, polish that was our livelihood then... did you go to the haeda? i'm telling you, twice a week to a private tutor and he taught us so was my sister my brother went to haeda and the little one, which perished eight years old do you remember the tutor's name? who? yes, mr. erlich poor yiddilim, the long beard they had only one son and we went on there after school twice a week because it was too much and poland has very severe winters some winters you cannot even step out from the house they had four seasons some it was hot, sculpting if... the spring was nice then the fall, the leaves start falling and in the wintertime a lot of times you couldn't step out from your house so much snow, so much ice the days in the wintertime are very short three o'clock in the afternoon when you've been going home from school especially hanukkah time it was already dark not pitch dark, but start to getting dark it was a beautiful life did you have any special cousins? yeah, all of them in fact, one of my cousins, we met in auschwitz she went... lynx and i went dressed she went to the side of the kitchen what was your name? fyker fella fyker yes, well maybe two years older than i did you have any special friends at the school? oh yes, we... it was a small city, population only 32,000 there were... i say there were more yiddens than poles but my sister, we talked in israel she said no but there were a lot of folk stories you know, the poland... the reichstorch means the one which is born in germany and the folk storage is the one which lived in all of poland and other countries and we had a lot, a lot of folk stories before the war, we knew the germans but you didn't know because they were poles but when the war broke out, every german was a german to hit the yidd was a mitzvah the war broke out, i'll never forget in 1939 on a friday morning i was staying and shaking the rocks on our balcony a lady in arabic comes running that means yiddish war that friday the next friday the germans were at our steps the germans were staying at the... where i lived was the main street, alai pilsen skäger and the germans were staying at the... with the jeeps and the shirts half down they were shaving themselves in the end not on the road, just in the... in the boulevard and i had a little... well, eight years old and a little cousin, they both ran out they looked at the soldiers, how they dressed and how they... they washing themselves for september it wasn't still so cold and one soldier said to the kids first piece to you, they gave to saul that means if you were at yidd, you go like that and the little boys came home my auntie and my mother, they said, ah, you said, don't don't talk about it this was other curve did you experience any other forms of anti-semitism when you were at school? no, at school the last years started for the anti-semitic they had... before jewish shops they had... they've been working with signs don't buy from a jew and school started really rough because on saturday we didn't go to school the jewish girls so we needed a lesson to have on shabbos when they're going, going from school they start playing dead they didn't want to give us the assignment but my mother said to me there is no such thing bribe them bribe them so we stayed before the school with a piece of cake from shabbos and they gave us the assignment they gave maybe the two jewish girls then we passed on and we made a lesson yeah, that's what they... other cover was a very nice city a textiles city the jewish parents family experience anti-semitism no, not yet but maybe it would be a little bit longer we would no, not yet the only thing was that we didn't know the school was something which we had to do but when i finished school in that shabshavitch building they had built a beautiful new school for girls with the old facilities, you know inside plumbing i was the last, even the last ones to evacuate that school but i didn't go to the white school my sister did how did your father react to the jews being forbidden to keep their shops open? my father and shabbos no, they were saying you should not keep your shops open during the week or they were saying with signs don't buy from a jew and a lot of poles believed it and they did and a lot of them didn't what was the relationship like between the gentiles and the jews? 90% of my father's customers were poles we didn't feel it not yet but maybe a few years later poland would be anticipating enough did you have any non-jewish friends? no with other covers, a small city and now i'm coming to my teenage years when i finished school we had a long-term organization called maccabi this was a strictly jewish organization we had a very beautiful big hall we congregate in the evenings and shabbos and every shabbos night there was an orchestra and there were dancers i was everyone of them, i can tell you and it was beautiful we, everybody knew everybody it was a small city when anshabes, we got together a bunch of teenagers we walked to a forest it was a forest, not far but it was pretty far to walk but we didn't even realize that we are coming that we walk we sang, we tell jokes boys and girls together we came into the forest we sat down and we sang up a song it was a beautiful primitive life we didn't have any washing machines didn't have any vacuums we sang, we sang, we sang, we sang you you