i'm conducting an interview with luma dohmann. today is the 18th of february 1996. the interview is being conducted in johannesburg, south africa in english. take two. can you tell me about your religious lifestyle in ojekoft? 90% of the jews were very religious. like i told you, they were the little hats. they've been gone to the shoes three times a day, two times a day, the morning for demonic prayers. then they met hamares as a victim, even chanukah when we had every jewish holiday was a big event. that's for the polish jewish life. like i say, if somebody wasn't from and he wanted to buy meat from another kosher butcher, he hid himself to go into seat. nobody sees him as he's buying non-kosher food. it was very religious. one incident i can tell you, on pesach, all the jewish bakeries were closed. the last day after pesach, one eat, it wasn't very film, he lit already the oven to bake for the next day for bread. because people have to pesach were running like to bread. as the people, the film people, saw the smoke going from the chimney, they went into the rabbi and the rabbi went there and you made a big, big thing about it. this was the jewish. that's why you know the jews lived a very, very authentic life. my father was a cohen. he was going to all the pitting events in the city. a lot of times i went along with him. it was very nice to see it. life was in general very beautiful in a primitive country. then it didn't, like i say, every jews was as it is. if you watch the film fiddler on the roof, you can describe exactly the polish hidden in poland. with the tzitzis, with the little heads, nobody there would do something wrong about religion. shabbos friday night, the lechszenten closed all the shabbos for shabbos. shabbos night, we went out, we had a good time. we were going to dances, all the teenagers. my father and mother, they were always on the go. they lived a really happy life. was it easy to come across kosher meat? no. they were butchers and bakers. my mother was a baker's daughter. all her relatives in ozkopf had a bakery, a jewish bakery. the jewish didn't know. all jews had no problem. a poultry, when you bought, you had to bring to sheikht and you had to clean it yourself and cozy yourself. if sometimes you make a mistake, i saw my mother doing, she used a knife for something, was for meat. she used a knife for something else by mistake. she took the knife, put him in the ground, and stayed in the ground a few, 24 hours. then the knife was kosher again. to this extent, that's everything was a heat. see? all polish jews were very religious. i think the most orthodox hidden you found in poland. in the big cities, there was something nice. was it easy to get religious articles? no. they had a jewish paper. it wasn't printed in ozkopf, it was printed in large, but every day, even my father without a jewish paper had to have a jewish paper. another thing, my father loved music, loved life. there were maybe ten radios in the whole of ozkopf before the war. who had the radio? mosostar. i swear to you, the day they installed our radio, they put in a big area on the roof. the same evening, the whole neighborhood was staying to listen to mosostar. they were maybe ten and i just know the city. no cars, only one taxi. there was no hospital in ozkopf when he took sick, or he got to lentszka, or he got to lodz. lodz had a big hospital. mostly, maternity women went to have their children in lodz, in hospital, because in our city, a lot, a lot of women died at chabert, a lot, a lot. from where did you get your talaisim, zidurim? they were a jewish store. my father had a talis, a big talis. he had to fill him. my brothers didn't live today. my youngest little brother was taken away when he was eight years old. he didn't have a talis yet. this one, the one is, it was twelve years old. the one is alive. he didn't live long enough to have the, we didn't live long enough in poland. that's my brother, heather b because when the war broke out, he was twelve years old. thank god i have this brother. we was the bormitzvah? there wasn't any bormitzvah. he was twelve years old. after he was in auschwitz. what was the bormitzvah like in horschachof? not as fancy as you do in here. mostly, you went to shoot, you made a kiddish, you know a brocha, and the boy read the, and that's it. you made patties, weddings. weddings, yes, this was a big event. but they were dances. every shabbos night, we went to dances. and we enjoyed like, and see my parents. when did you start feeling that trouble was looming and going to affect your family? we didn't, we didn't hear as much. who read hitler's mein kampf? knew what's going to, when he wrote this in jail in austria. you know this, the book mein kampf. who read this book knew what's gonna happen to the eden. but we didn't realize it's just around the corner. i remember one shabbos, everybody was out and having a good time. they say hitler is going to invade czechoslovakia because he wants sudetenland from czechoslovakia, which belonged once to germany. he wanted this. he gave them ultimatum and the czechs didn't have no choice. they gave him back sudetenland. six months later, he said to poland, he wants the olgia. this was a town near the german border. he wants the olgia. the poles said they will not give him. but for some reason, six months later, they gave back to hitler, so olgia. as they gave him back, he said, i have a kind of a longing. that means i have no saying that i want more land. that's what i wanted. sudetenland and olgia. six months later, the war broke out. a lot of politicians talked about, i remember my father used to be also the head of the union, of telly's union in ozykov. they used to have meetings. when they come for the meetings, they were discussing politics too. a lot of indians said, see, hitler will attack poland. the poles were too stupid to realize because just before, maybe six months before the war, there was a lady named pristor rother. she gave a project into the senate that the eden are not supposed to cut their cows. they're supposed to shoot them. it's unhumane. it's unhumane to cut the throat from the cows. and this was gone on. that we start feeling the anti-semitism in poland. this was gone on for months and months. by the time hitler, they were thinking about the jews, they couldn't, about their meat. and hitler, meanwhile, looked into poland. six months later, the war broke out. as to what? everybody didn't come down to the war. it was law. didn't come down to the law that they have to shoot the animals. but they, the goyim, when they were shooting a hazard, a pig, first they were pouring hot water off the pig. and then they shot him. this was humane to the pristor rother. madame pristor rother. i believe she must have been our folk stokes. so, you know, everybody was heartbroken. we start feeling a little bit, but not as much as we would maybe in two, three years later, poland will come. they'll become very anti-semitic. when did you have to start closing shops? no, we had, we had the shops till the war started. there were regular shops. my father had a lot of customers. regular shop. only that black friday when the war broke out. my father had lots of materials, you know, because when somebody wanted a suit, my father showed them a sample and then he brought the material and made a suit. and we, as customers, we didn't feel yet. that is going to start very much anti-semitic. my father had a lot of folk storage customers in north dakota. and as the war broke out, everybody was a german. before the war, you didn't even realize, let's say, a germans. going to polish school. they had a church. they had german church. and the boys, everybody, my father has the best customers. he has a customer, karl mowel. there were two brothers. one was janik mowel, one was karl mowel. they had two sons, my father, for all of them was some. karl was a baker. he had a pot belly like this. nobody in the city could make a suit for karl mowel, karl mowel, my father made. in the war, he came to my father's shop. my father made him two suits. he shook my father. my father was small, not tall. he said, i initiated us to you the best. that is just to study that you are a jew with your hands what you can do. he was our cousin. i just said to my son today, as anti-semitic, maybe they were. my father made him during the beginning of the war, two suits. and he didn't, a lot of germans just took it and didn't pay. he said to my father, you take out the bakery goods. he had a bakery. it didn't work. it was a rich german. he said to my father, you send every day your daughter or your son for bakery goods and you'll have it. i used to go every morning to bring karl mowel. his brother was also a folkster. he met my father and he said, go to the fields till you arrive to my house and i'll give you some dead time. we start easing and caution. but my mother, you could kill her. she said, i'd rather die as i should eat chaser. she didn't eat. absolutely not. then the war broke out, 1939, september 1st. i never forget i was staying and shaking our rugs and the balcony. a lady and neighbors come running. it's that it's just, you know, little things but you remember we had that beautiful cage with that canary and my father's, this was his pleasure and that shabbos, when the war broke out friday was still quiet in poland, we ran out and my father always used to close all the windows and all the doors from the house and he let that bit out to run around to trap some exercise. as we came back then shabbos from home, matches was gone. why? my father forgot to close the door from the balcony. the matches was gone. so the cage was still staying and we had customers like i said folks that one of young fellow, i came up, cal passed our flat and neither man the radio and the bed cage and the bed but the bed wasn't alive. it was gone. so he took this. my father said then, cal was master. he didn't have an answer. he went, he took it and his father was a very good customer of ours but the youth turned right away to be in a german person, a uniform, a gestapo uniform and beating the eden. then we come again to ozarkov and the germans took over ozarkov after six days. they came in. three days later, they burned the shoe and a little bit later, we had to get off the main street. what did they do with the shoe? they burned it to the ground. told you. a lot of feeling went home and we got a heart attack and died. you're the other for me. so they chased us off the main street. we lived in the main street. we had to move out from our apartment. we went to kazmulakkale, she looked us in. we've been stuffed like herrings. my father had still the shop. he was working. made money. a lot of them paid. not much but they paid. we had all the reichsturge from germany. the mayor was a german from the state, not a polish jew, not a polish german. my father, one day they walked into our house with a horse, his wife and a horse. my father made it suits for his wife and he made him for christmas when he went home. my father made him a whole wardrobe. he came back. he didn't have any words what to say. he also said, i decided that you are a jew with your hands. so we lived with our cousins maybe two months. this was still 1939. then one day they announcing the jews going into ozarkov ghetto. but till we got into the ghetto, first they took us to the white school like my sons just said to the white school. they addressed us to nothing and they branded us. no, first they took us to our hanging. they hang eight yiddish boys, two brothers between them. from the hanging, they took us to the white school. in the white school, they branded us a and b. my little brother had a and he had all b's. then they chased us into the ghetto. my parents, everybody, naked, stuck naked, we all stayed together. they branded us and then they sent us home. we went home a few days. they made a guinerelco so that this time they took my little brother. he was eight years old. i had a cousin, a tuck who's where my father had the shop in the house till the ghetto. her and two little children, a little boy and a little girl. they all went. my mother wasn't beside herself. her life had ended while they took a little baby. now we are in ozarkov ghetto. we're going out every day out of the ghetto by god to work. they gave again my father a shop and were selling again for the germans. there were other shops too, not just my father. they were desk making. the germans came like no paradise. they took them in a big building. they sold machines, the mirrors. everything they took to the shop. they came over there for having things done. the ladies with desk making, everything. which streets were included in the ozarkov ghetto? there was a new section developed which lived on the poles because ait didn't live there. because ait, the shoe, neat cashrot, and they wouldn't live there. but the poles made an upper hill. i don't even remember where it was. they chased out the poles. there were little single dwellings. in one dwelling, there were three families. the germans put in us, another man, and another lady. three rooms, each room, one family. how many people altogether? there wasn't much left of the eden. the elderly eden didn't come in together. when they hanged those people and they took us in to that white school, half of the jewish population was taken already to the gas chamber. they didn't go to the gas chamber. they went to helno where one transport had to dig for the other one, the graves. first they dig for themselves and when they finished they dig the grave for the uncommon. there was my little brother too. people were saying that they've been buried alive. there was a couple with four children and a wife. we were three children. my little brother was gone already. only one single lady. in one little house, there were three families in one little house. it wasn't enough for the people to get in. they built, you should see, some houses for the people. my cousin, she was between them. she got a flat in the new buildings. my father was a celebrity with the germans so they gave him a nice room, one room. what street were you in? it was just at the developing. i really couldn't tell you about the street. i know where it was. every day we walked to the shops and sold. my mother never knew how to keep a needle in her hands because she was left-handed. everybody was a tail in the house so my mother didn't know how to sew. we had to go in order to get your ration. you had to work. if you didn't work, you don't eat to get the ration. we took our mother with us. she said, and we've been sewing for her, my sister and myself. we made her production and she got every day of soup in azucob. it wasn't as bad in azucob as it came later because we went out, we had people which knew us but somebody something. somebody sold this and that. we lived. we were not hungry as we've been in the 30 times. we all went out to work. in the evening they took us back and the next morning is same thing. one thing we didn't work on sunday, shabbos we did. that's what the gym is for. you you