i'm conducting an interview with luma doman. today is the 18th of february 1996. the interview is being conducted in johannesburg, south africa, in english. take two. can you tell me about your religious lifestyle in order of love? i was a co-author. there were 90% of the jews were very religious. like i told you, they were co-potties, they were little hats. they were going to shoot three times a day, the morning for the money players. then they made a marriage for the big thing. even chanukah, when we had every jewish holiday, was a big event. that's for the polish jews' life. like i say, if somebody wasn't from any one of the by meat from not a kosher butter, he hid himself to go in to see that nobody sees him buying non-coach food. for the very religious, one incident i can tell you, on pesar, all the jewish bakeries were closed. the last day after pesar, one yeet, he wasn't very firm. he lit already the oven to bake for the next day for bread, because people at pesar were running like for bread. as the people, the firm people saw the smoke going from the chimney, they went into the rabbi and the rabbi went there and he made a big, big thing about it. this was the jewish. that's why, you know, the jews lived a very, very orthodox life. my father was a cohen. he was going to all the pieden events in the city. a lot of times i went along with him. it was very nice to see it. life was in general very beautiful in a primitive country. then it didn't, like i say, every jewish baza alita, if you watch the film, you can describe exactly the polish, hidden in poland, with the titties, with the little heads. nobody there would do something wrong with the religion. shabbos friday night, the left-cent, closed all the shabbos. shabbos for shabbos. shabbos night, we went out, we had a good time. we were going to dances, all the teenagers. my father and mother, they were always on the go. they lived a really happy life. was it easy to come across kosher meat? no. they were butchers and bakers. my mother was a baker's daughter. in all relative in other cup had a bakery, a jewish bakery. the jewish bazaed in, no. all jews, no problem. a polteries, when you bought, you had to bring to share it. and you had to clean it yourself and cosy yourself. if sometimes you make a mistake, i saw my mother, she used a knife for something, was for meat. and she used a knife for something else, for a mistake. she took the knife, put it in the ground. it stayed in the ground. a few, twenty-four hours, then the knife was kosher again. to this extent, that's every eid was eid. see, all polters chose for various leaders. i think that the most utter duck season you found in poland. and in the big cities, for something else. see? was it easy to get religious articles? no. no. they had a jewish paper, wasn't printed in ozzacut, was printed in lunch. but every day, my father, without a jewish paper, had to have a jewish paper. and another thing, my father loved music, loved life. there were maybe ten radios in the whole ozzacut before the war. who had the radio? musselstach. and i swear to you, today they installed our radio. they put in a big area, land of the roof. and the same evening, the whole neighborhood was staying to listen to musselstach. there were maybe ten radios in the whole city. no cars. only one taxi. there was no hospital in ozzacut when he took sick. or he got to lunch, lunch had a big hospital. mostly, maternity women went to have children in lunch in the hospital. because in our city, a lot of women died in the chair. a lot, a lot. from where did you get to talaisim, zidurim, to the very first time? there was a jewish star. my father had a tallish, a big tallish. he had a trillium. and my brothers didn't live today. my youngest little brother was taken away when he was 80 years old. he didn't have a tallish yet. and this one, the one was 12 years old. the one who is alive, he didn't live long enough to have the... we didn't live long enough in poland. that's my brother, heather bimesa. because when the bro, guabrakhat, he was 12 years old. and thank god i have this brother. we was the bomitsva? there wasn't anybody, it was 12 years old. in dornig, after he was in auschwitz. what was the bomitsva like in horsakov? not as fancy as you're doing here. mostly you want to shoot, you make a kiddish, you know a brochka. and the boy read the... and that's it. didn't make parties, weddings, weddings, yes, this was a big event. but they were dancers. every shabbos night, he went to dances. he enjoyed life. can see my parents. when did you start feeling that trouble was looming and going to affect your family? we didn't hear as much. who read hitler's mind-count? knew. when he wrote this in jail in austria. you know this, the book mind-count? who read this book knew what's going to happen to the eden? but we didn't realize it's just around the corner of it. i remember one shabbos. everybody was out and having a good time. they say hitler is going to invade czechoslovakia because he wants to death in land. from czechoslovakia, which belonged once to germany. he wanted to give them ultimatum and their checks didn't have no choice. they gave him back to death in land. six months later, he set the poland. he wants the ultimatum. this was an atom near the german border. he wants the ultimatum. the poles said they were not given. but for some reason, six months later, they gave back to hitler. as he gave him back, he said, he had been married kind of a lunging. that means i have no saying that i want more land. that's what i wanted. so that's in land and to the ultimatum. six months later, the war broke out. a lot of politicians talked about it. but i remember my father used to be also the head of the union, of taylor's union in azerko. they used to have meetings. when they come for the meetings, they've been discussing politics too. a lot of unions said, say hitler will attack poland. but the poles were too stupid to realize because just before maybe six months before the war, there wasn't in the senate, there was a lady named pristra rava. she gave a project into the senate that the eden are not supposed to cut their cows. they're supposed to shoot them. it's on your mane. it's on your mane to cut the trout from the cows. and this was gone on. that we start feeling the antisemitism in poland. this was gone on for months and months by the time hitler, they were thinking about the jews because they couldn't, about their meat. and hitler meanwhile looked into poland. six months later, the war broke out. as to what? and the fig to your family. everybody didn't come down to the, it was law. you see? they didn't come down to law that they should do their animals. not to. but they, the goyim, when they checked in a hazard, a pig, first they pouring over the hot water of the pig. and then they checked me. this was your main to the pristra rava. madam, pristra rava. i believe she must have been our folkstarch. so, you know, everybody was heartbroken. we start feeling a little bit, but not as much as we would, maybe in two, three years later, poland will come, they will come very un-disomitic. when did you have to start closing the shops? no, you had, we had the shops still. the war started. there were regularly shops. my father had a lot of customers. i had a little shop, only that black friday, when the war broke up. my father had lots of materials, you know, because when somebody wanted to shoot, my father showed them a sample. and then he brought the material and made it shoot. and now, we, as customers, we didn't feel yet. and that is going to start very much in the committees. my father had a lot of folkstarch customers in nausica. and as the war broke out, everybody was a german. before the war, you didn't even realize, let's say, a german. they were going to polish school. they had a church. they had a german church. and the boys, everybody, my father had the best customers. he had a customer, karl moewe. they were two brothers. it was janik maier. one was karl moewe. they had two sons, my father, for all of them. karl moewe was a baker. he had a pot belly like this. nobody in the city could make a suit for karl moewe. my father made it. in the war, he came to my father's shop. my father made him too suit. he shook my father. my father was small. not tall. he said, i'm the child of the dust to you, the best. my tiny hand. it's just a study that you are a jew with your hands what you can do. and he was our customer. and i just had to my son today. as anti-semitic, maybe they were. my father made him in the beginning of the war. two suits. and he didn't, a lot of germans just took it and didn't pay. he said to my father, you take out a bakery, good. he had a bakery. he didn't work. it was a rich german. he said to my father, you send every day your daughter or your son for bakery goods. and you'll have it. i used to go every morning to bring karl moewe. and his brother was also a folkster. he met my father and he said, story, go to the fields until you arrive to my house and i'll give you some death time. we sat easing and caution. but my mother, you could kill her. she said, i'd rather die, just i should eat hazard. she didn't eat. absolutely nothing. then the war broke out. 1989, september 1. i never forget. i was staying and shaking my rocks and the balcony. a lady and a neighbor's camera running. it's just little things, but you remember. we had a beautiful cage with that canary. and my father's, this was his pleasure. and that chubbies, when the war broke out friday, it was still quiet in poland. we went out and my father always used to close all the windows and all the doors from the house and let that bed out to run around to trap some exercise. as we came back to the chubbies from home, march was gone. why? my father forgot to close the door from the balcony. the balcony was gone. so the cage was still staying and we had customers like i said, like i said, one of young fellow named karl paz. i came up karl paz, i was led and he the men, the radio and the bed cage and the bed. but the bed wasn't a lie. it was gone. so he took this. my father said, then karl was master. he didn't have a nature. he went. he took it. and his father was a very good customer of ours, but the youth didn't either way to be in a german, put on the uniform and get stuck with the uniform and beating the youth. then we come again to ozuka. and the germans took over ozuka after six days. they came in three days later. they went to shoot. and a little bit later we had to get off the main street. what did they do at the chubb? to abandon it to the ground. i told you. a lot of people went home and we got out of the text and died. you got all the other for me. so they chased us off the main street. we lived in the main street. we had to move out of my apartment. we went to the car and we had stuff like herrings. my father had still the shop. he was working. he made money. a lot of them paid. not much, but they paid. we had all the rights from germany. the mayor was a german from the state. not a polish jew. not a polish german. my father walked in to our house with his wife. my father made a suit for his wife. he made him for christmas. when he went home, my father made him a whole wardrobe. he came back. he didn't have any words to say. he also said, i decided that you were a jew with your hands. so we lived with our cousins maybe two months. this was still 1939. one day they announcing the jews going into the other cogeta. but until we got into the ghetto, first they took us to the white school. my sons just said to the white school. they endorsed us to nothing. and they branded us. now first they took us to a hanging. they hung eight jewish boys. two brothers from between them. and from the hanging they took us to the white school. in the white school they branded us a and b. my little brother had a and he had all peace. and then they chased us into the ghetto. my parents, everybody, stuck naked. we all stayed together. they branded us and then they sent us home. we went home a few days. they made a dinner roll call. so that this time they took my little brother. i was an eight-year-old. and i had a cousin, a tuckish where my father had the shop. and then i was killed in the ghetto. and i had two little children. a little boy and another girl. they all went. my mother wasn't beside herself. my wife had ended while they took a little baby. so now we are in the ghetto. we go out every day out of the ghetto by god to work. and they gave my father a shop and they were sown again for the germans. and there were other shops, not just my father. and they were desk-making. the germans came like no paradise. they took them in in a big building. there were some machines. the mirrors. i was everything they took to the shop. and they came over there for having things done. they were the ladies with desk-making. everything. which streets were included in the also-cough data. there was a section, a new section developed, which lived only poles because i eat. didn't live there. because i eat the shoe, i eat cashewrot, and they wouldn't live there. but the poles made up a hill. i don't even remember what it was. they chased out the poles. they were little single dwellings. and one dwelling, there were three families. the germans put in us, another man and another lady. three rooms, each room, one family. how many people altogether? there wasn't much left of the elderly. the elderly didn't come in together. when they hanged those people and they took us into that white school, half of the jewish population was taken ready to the gas chamber. they didn't go to the gas chamber. they went to hell now. one transport had to dig for the other one, the graves. first, they dig for themselves. and when they finished, they dig the grave for the oncoming. and there was my little brother, too. people were saying that they had been buried alive. i think they lived in the apartment with you. there was a couple with four children and a wife. we were three children. my little brother was gone already. and only one single lady. in one little house, they were in one little house. they were three families in one little house. so it wasn't enough for the people to get in. they built, you should see, some houses for the people. my cousin, she was between them. she got a flat in the new buildings. my father was a celebrity with the germans, so they gave him a nice room. one room. what street were you in? it was just that they were developing. i really couldn't tell you about this. i know where it was. and every day we walked to the shops. and so my mother, it's never knew how to keep an needle in hand because she was left-handed. and everybody was a day-lend house, so my mother didn't know how to sew. so we had to go on order to get your ration. you had to work. if you didn't work, you don't eat to get the ration. so we took our mother with us. and she said, we've been sewing for her. my sister and myself. and we made her production. and she got every day of soap in azakob. it wasn't as bad in azakob as it came later because we went out and we had people which knew us, brought to somebody something. somebody sold this and that. we lived. we were not hungry as we've been in the first times. we all went out to work. and in the evening they took us back. and the next morning they sent one thing. we didn't work on sunday. shabbos we did. yeah. that's what the gym is for. you you