I'm conducting an interview with Bluma Doman. Today is the 18th of February, 1996. The interview is being conducted in Johannesburg, South Africa, in English-- tape two. OK. Can you tell me about your religious lifestyle in Ozorkow? Ozorkow-- there were-- 90% of the Jews were very religious. Like I told you, they wore kippahs. They wore their little hats. They will go into shul three times a day-- two times a day-- in the morning, for the morning prayers. Then the Mincha Maariv was a big thing. Even Hanukkah, when we had-- every Jewish holiday was a-- a big event. That's was the Polish-Jewish life. Like I say, if somebody wasn't from-- and he wanted to buy meat from a-- not a kosher butcher-- he hid himself to go in to see that nobody sees him that he's buying non-kosher food. It was very religious. One incident I can tell you. On Pesach, all the Jewish bakeries were closed. The last day after Pesach, one Yid-- he wasn't very firm. He lit already the oven to bake for the next day for bread, because people after Pesach were running out of bread. As the-- the people-- the firm people saw the smoke coming from the chimney, they went into the Rabbi, and the Rabbi went there. And he made a big, big thing about it. This was a Jewish-- that's why you know, the Jews-- the Jews lived a very, very orthodox life. My father was a kohen. He was going to all in the city. A lot of times I went along with him. It was very nice to see it. And life was in general very beautiful in the primitive country. Then it didn't-- like-- like I say, every Jew was a Yiddish. If you watch the film, you can describe exactly the Polish Yidden in Poland-- with the tzitzits, with the little hats. Nobody there would-- would do something wrong about religion. Shabbos Friday night-- closed all the shops. Shabbos was Shabbos. Shabbos night we went out, we had a good time. We would go to dances-- all the teenagers. My father and mother, they were always on the go. They lived a really happy life. Was it easy to come across kosher meat? No. There were butchers, bakers-- my mother was a-- a baker's daughter, and all her relatives in Ozorkow had a bakery-- a Jewish bakery. The Jewish bread, they-- no. All Jews eat-- no problem. Poultries, when you bought, you had to bring to and you had to clean it yourself and kosher yourself. If-- if sometimes you make a mistake-- I saw my mother doing-- she used a-- a knife or something. It was from meat. And she used a knife for something else by mistake. She took the knife, put it in-- in the ground. And it stayed in the ground a few-- 24 hours. Then the-- the knife was kosher again. To this extent-- that's every Yid was a Yid. See? All Polish Jews were very religious. I think the-- the-- the most orthodox Yidden you'll find in Poland. And in the big cities-- sha-- it was something nice! See? Was it easy to get religious articles? No. No. We had a Jewish paper. It wasn't printed in Ozorkow. It was printed in Lodz. It was every day. I mean, my father without a Jewish paper? He had to have a Jewish paper. And another thing, my father loved music-- loved life. There were maybe 10 radios in the whole of Ozorkow before the war. Who had a radio? Moshe Sztorch. I swear to you, the day they installed our radio, they put in a big reel on the roof. And the same evening, the whole neighborhood was staying to listen to Moshe Sztorch's radio. There were maybe 10 radios in the whole city-- no cars-- only one taxi. There was no hospital in Ozorkow. When you took sick, you go to Leczyca, or you go to Lodz. Lodz had a big hospital. Mostly maternity women went to have their children in Lodz, in hospital, because in-- in our, you know, city a lot, a lot of women died at childbirth-- a lot, a lot. And-- From where did you get your They-- there was-- there were a Jewish store. My father had a tallis-- a big tallis. He had the And my brothers didn't live to the day. My youngest little brother was taken away when he was eight years old. He didn't have a tallis, yet. And this one-- the one is-- was 12 years old-- the one who's alive-- he didn't live long enough to have the-- we didn't live long enough in Poland that's my brother had a bar mitzvah. Because when the war broke out, he was 12 years old. And thank God I have this brother. Where was the bar mitzvah? There wasn't any bar mitzvah. He was 12 years old when after that, he was in Auschwitz. What was a bar mitzvah like in Ozorkow? Not as fancy as you do in here. Mostly you went to shul. You made the kiddush, you know, a bracha. And the boy read the-- the-- and that's it. You didn't make parties, weddings. Weddings, yes, this was a big event. But there were dances. Every Shabbos night we went to dances. And we enjoy like-- I can see my parents. When did you start feeling that trouble was looming and going to affect your family? We didn't-- we didn't hear as much. Who read Hitler's knew what's going-- when he wrote this in-- in jail, in Austria. You know this-- the book Who read this book knew what's going to happen to the Yidden. But we didn't realize it's just around the corner of us. I remember one Shabbos, everybody was out and having a good time. They say Hitler is going to invade Czechoslovakia, because he wants Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia, which belonged once to Germany. He wanted this. He gave them an ultimatum. And the Czechs didn't have no choice. They gave him back Sudetenland. Six months later, he said to Poland, he wants Zaolzie. This was a-- a town near to the German border. He wants Zaolzie. The Poles said they will not give him. But for some reason, six months later, they gave back to Hitler Zaolzie. As he gave him back, he said, That means, I have no-- saying that I want more land. That's what I wanted, Sudetenland and Zaolzie. Six months later, the war broke out. A lot of politicians talked about it. I remember my father used to be also the head of the union-- of tailors' union-- in Ozorkow. And they used to have meetings. When they come for the meetings, they been discussing politics, too. And a lot of Yiddens said, see? Hitler will attack Poland. So-- but the Poles were too stupid to realize. Because just before, maybe six months before the war, there was in the-- in the senate, there was a lady named She gave a project into the senate that the Yidden are not supposed to cut their cows. They're supposed to shoot them. It's un-humane. It's un-humane to-- to cut the-- the throat from the-- from the cows. And this was going on. That we start feeling the anti-Semitism in Poland. This was going on for months and months. By the time Hitler-- they were thinking about the Jews-- 'cause they couldn't-- about their meat. And Hitler, meanwhile, looked into Poland. Six months later, the war broke out. After war-- How did it affect your family? Everybody didn't come down to the-- that's-- it was law. You see? Didn't come down the law that's they have to shoot the-- the animals-- not to. But they, the goyim, when they a pig, first they pouring over hot water over the pig. And then they This was humane to the-- to the Madam I believe she must have been a volksdeutsche. So you know, everybody was heartbroken. We start feeling a little bit, but not this much as we would maybe in two, three years later. Poland will come-- will become very anti-Semitic. When did you have to start closing you shops and leaving your homes? No, we had-- we had the shops till the war started. There were regular shops. My father had lot of customers-- a regular shop-- only that Black Friday, when the war broke out. My father had lots of materials, you know, because when somebody wanted a suit, my father showed them a sample. And then he bought the material, and he made a suit. And as customers, we didn't feel yet that it's going to start very much anti-Semitism. My father had a lot of volksdeutsche customers in Ozorkow. And as the war broke out, everybody was a German. Before the war, you didn't even realize that they are Germans. We're going to a Polish school. They had a-- a church they had-- a German church. And the boys, everybody, my-- my father has the-- the best customers. He has a customer, Karl Morit. They were two brothers. One was Yanik Mayer. One was Karl Morit. They had two sons. My father-- for all of them was sewn. Karl was a baker. He had a-- a pot belly like this. Nobody in the city could make a suit for Karl-- Karl Morit. My father made. In the war, he came to my father's shop. My father made him two suit. He shook my father. My father was small-- not tall. He said, That's-- it's just to sorry that you are a Jew-- with your hands-- what you can do. And he was our customer. And I-- I just said to my son today, as antisemitic-- maybe they were, my father made him in the-- during the beginning of the war, two suits, and he didn't-- a lot of Germans just took it and didn't pay. He said to my father, you take out in bakery goods. He had-- it was-- it was-- a bakery. He had a bakery. He didn't work. He was a rich German. He said to my father, you send every day your daughter, or your son, for-- for bakery goods, and you'll have it. I used to go every morning to bring from Karl Morit. It was a-- this. And his brother was also a volksdeutsche. He met my father. And he said, go to-- go through the fields till you arrive to my house, and I'll give you some. At that time, we start eating unkosher. But my mother, you could kill her. She said, I rather die that I should eat Kashrut. She didn't eat. Absolutely not. Then the war broke out 1939, September 1st. I never forget. I was standing, shaking our rugs on the-- the balcony. A lady-- our neighbors come running. war, war. It start-- it's just-- you know, little things-- but you remember. We had a beautiful cage with that canary. And my father's-- this was his-- his pleasure. And that Shabbos when the war broke out-- Friday was still quiet in Poland-- we went out. And my father always used to close all the windows and all the doors from the house. And he let that bird out to run around, to-- to have some exercise. As we came back then-- Shabbos-- from home, was gone. Why? My father forgot to close the door from the patio-- from the balcony. And was gone. So the-- the cage was still staying. And we had customers, like I said, volksdeutsche. One-- a young fellow-- Main Karl passed. I came up. Karl passed to our flat, and he demanded the radio, and the birdcage, and the bird. But the bird wasn't-- it was gone. So he took this. My father said to him, Karl, He didn't-- he didn't have an answer. He went. He took it. And his father was a very good customer. My father respect him. The youth turned right away to being a German-- puts on the uniform, a Gestapo uniform, and beating the-- Then we come again to Ozorkow. And the-- the Germans took over Ozorkow after six days. They came in. Three days later, they went to shul. And a little bit later they-- we had to get off the main street. What did they do at the shul? They burned it to the ground. I told you. The-- as a lot of Yidden went home-- and they got heart attacks and died. You-- the-- all your-- the older, from Yidden. So they chased us off the main street. We live in the main street. We have to move out from our apartment. We went to a cousin. Luckily, she let us in. We been stuffed like herrings. My father had still the shop. He was working and made-- he made money! A lot of them paid-- not much, but they paid. We had all the Reichsdeutsche from Germany, you know? The-- the mayor was a German from the state, not a Polish Jew-- not a Polish German-- and know my father. One day, they walked into our house with a horse-- his wife found a horse. My father made her suits-- for his wife. And he made them for-- for Christmas. When he went home, my father made him a whole wardrobe. He came back, he didn't have any words what to say. He also said, sorry that you are a Jew-- with your hands. So we lived with our cousins maybe two months. This was still 1939. Then one day, they're announcing the Jews going in to Ozorkow ghetto. But, till we get into the ghetto-- first, they took us to the Reich school, like my-- my son just said-- to the Reich school. They undressed us to the-- to nothing. And they branded us. No. First, they took us to a hanging-- to hang eight Yiddish boys. Two brothers were with-- between them. And from the hanging, they took us to the Reich school. In the Reich school, they branded us A and B. My little brother had the A, and we had all Bs. OK? And then they chased us into the ghetto. Who was with you? My parents, everybody-- naked-- stark naked we all stayed together. They branded us, and then they send us home. We went home a few days. They made again a roll call. So that this time, they took my little brother. He was eight years old. And I had a-- a cousin, that is where my father had the shop-- in their house till the ghetto-- her and two little children-- a little boy and a little girl. They all went. My mother wasn't beside herself. Her life had ended while they took her little baby. So now we are in Ozorkow ghetto. We're going out every day out of the ghetto by cart-- to work. So they gave-- again, my father a shop, and was sewing again for the Germans. And there were other shops, too, not just my father. And there were dressmaking. The Germans came like in a paradise. They took them in in a big building-- the-- the sewing machines, the mirrors. Everything they took to the shop. And they cried. They came over there for-- for having things done-- the-- the ladies with dressmaking, with everything. Which streets were included in the Ozorkow ghetto? There was a section-- a new section developed, which lived only Poles. Because a Yid wouldn't live there. Because a Yid in the shul need And they wouldn't live there. But the Poles made-- up a hill-- I don't even remember where it was. They chased out the Poles. There were little single dwellings. And in one dwelling there were three family. The Germans putting us, another man, and another lady, three rooms-- each room one-- one family. And-- How many people all together? There wasn't much left of the Yidden. The elder Yidden didn't come in the ghetto. Like when they hang those people and they took us in to that Reich school, the 1/2 of the Jewish population was taken already to the gas chamber. They didn't go to the gas chamber. They went to Chelmno where one transport had to dig for the other one the graves. First, they dig for themself. And when they finished, they digged the grave for the oncoming. And there was my little brother, too. People were saying that they been buried alive. So these-- How many people lived in the apartment with you? There was a couple with four children and a wife. We were three children-- then my little boy-- my little brother was gone already. And-- and then-- and only one single lady. In one little house they were-- in one little house-- there were three families in one little house. So it wasn't enough for the people to get in. They build-- you should see some-- some houses-- for the people. My cousin-- she was-- between them, she got a-- a flat in the new buildings. My father was a celebrity with the Germans, so they gave him a nice room-- one room. And-- What street were you in? I-- this was a-- just a-- a developing. I really couldn't tell you about this street. I know it was-- where it was. And every day, we walked to the shops and sewed. My mother, she never knew how to keep a needle in her hands, because she was left-handed. And everybody was a tailor in the house. So my mother didn't know how to sew. So we had to go. In order to get your ration, you had to work. If you didn't work, you don't eat-- to get the ration. So we took our mother with us, and she said-- and we've been sewing for her-- my sister and myself. And we made her production. And she got every day a soup in Ozorkow. It wasn't as bad in Ozorkow as it came later. Because we went out, and we had people which knew us-- somebody-- something-- somebody sold this and that. We-- we-- we lived. We were not hungry as we'd been in the further times. We all went out to work. And in the evening, they took us back. And in the next morning, the same thing. One thing-- we didn't work on Sunday-- Shabbos we did. Yeah. That's what the Germans for.