point five enter................ today is february the 18th 1996. i'm interviewing blume domen. her maiden name is stortch. my name is raylene brask. i'm conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. my name is raylene brask. i'm interviewing blume domen. her maiden name is stortch. today is the 18th of february 1996. i'm conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. my name is raylene. what is your full name? blume domen. can you spell it? blume domen. what was your name at birth? her birth, stortch. s-s-t-o-r-c-h. did you have any other names? no, never. did you have any other surnames? no. was your name ever changed? no. yes, it was changed in america because originally our name was domenkiewicz. when we became citizens of the united states, we shortened it to domen. can you spell domenkiewicz? d-o-n-a-n-k-i-e-w-i-c-z. when were you born? at the 28th of, no the 8th of january 1920. what is your age now? 76. 86. where were you born? in poland, in a small city named ozarkow. can you spell that for me? o-z-r-k-i-w-i-c-z. ozarkow. ozarkow. do you remember your address? yes, 29th alepius zizkego in ozarkow. what were your parents' names? my mother's name was bela. my father's name was moshe. did you have any brothers or sisters? yes, i did. we were in a family of four children, two brothers and two sisters. what were your brothers' names? the brothers' name is aria. he lives in los angeles. and my sister, i have a sister, lives in los angeles, helen. and one little brother perished in 19 – before we went into ghetto. he died. they took away. he was eight years old. can you tell me how your parents earned a living? a very nice living. my father was a very good tailor, the best in the city. and we lived a very nice life in poland. how did he earn his money? he had a tailor shop, was a tailor. a shop making sewing for, for their light from the – all the light in, in ozarkow. they were my father's customers. we had a nice shop. my father was – so i dealt. and your mother? my mother was a housewife. she – her maiden name is mos – was moskowiec, a very good-looking lady. and so was my father. they were very devoted couple and very devoted parents. like i said, my father made a very good living. he was a councilman in ozarkow, in city hall. all the light from this ozarkow were my father's customers. the best tailor in the city. my parents were very youthful, devoted to each other. we'd go into old places where it was just something to dance or to play. we always been there. and my mother was a very good cook, a baker. and above all, the best mother and clean. our house was so clean, we could eat from the floor. everybody knew. my mother was so was my father. they called in ozarkow the tall bailer. did they belong to any organization? oh yes. my father was a councilman, honorary in the city hall. then he was – he formed – he loved music, so he formed a band from all jewish boys. and every sunday they walked in the avenues, pilsitz gegel, and they played the jewish music orchestra. my father was the president of this organization. and he formed it when they played every sunday. my father, right in front, with white shoes, white pants, and a navy alpaca jacket. it was very sharp dressing. the orchestra had only hats. they didn't have any uniform, just hats. so was my father. they loved to dance. they loved to go places. and when i go all there, they took me along. my father belonged to all americans. he was running the labor – the labor union from the terrace. and there were meetings in our house. we lived in a very beautiful flat. and my father has a shop there. i've been going – in poland, you start going to school seven – seven years. can you tell me about your grandparents? yes. my mother's parents – my mother did hardly knew. but my – my father, i remember very distinctly my grandparents, because every pesach my mother baked cakes. they lived in a nearby city called lanchica. today it was again a university city. all the higher school and elementary students were attending in lanchica. my father used to take me to my grandparents. every pesach my mother baked lots of cakes. and i went home with my father. i don't think that my sister and brother remember them. but i was the oldest. and it stuck in my mind. my grandfather owned a fishing shop. when i knew him, he was already retired. i lived with the long capacity, with the – you know, with the – and when i came, it was the life of the party. my zeder, my father's father, was davening for the prisoners, lynches for the prison. ozarkov didn't have a prison. so when they were fugitives, they were sitting in lynches. it was an hour rise nearby. can you spell? what? lynches. lynches. and i went home always with my father on a train. the train was going so low, so slow that you could walk quicker. but we went home. my zeder was davening for the fugitives in the jail. every shabbes and every holiday, we went over there to daven with the jewish boys. they were not killers, just for maybe a texting evasion or maybe they stole something. the crime in poland was very, very low, very low. and after i visited with my grandparents, we went home. you want me to say about my childhood? i was seven years old. i started first grade. that's the mandatory age to come to school. you have seven grades. to 14 years old, you come out from school. what was the name of your school? shabshevich was a big private building. shabshevich. s-a-p-s-c-e-w-i-c-z. shabshevich. it wasn't a first-class school. in fact, when i finished, the school was moved. they moved. there were two schools only. one for boys, one for girls. there was no goya or aida. everybody went to the same school. a public school. a public school. when you finish at 14, you observe a lot, a lot in that school. we took biology, geography, math, compositions, history, and even jewish history, too. not too close to the world, but we had, we didn't, we only knew jewish history. the learning to govern and to write yiddish, to read yiddish papers was very common in the other jewish papers. and so, so when i finished school, i was 14 years old, had seven grades, a lot of observing. i was very good in school. whenever i wrote the composition, the teacher brought it back. i had always a fight, and i had to stay in front of the school and read it, what i wrote. i was very good in singing. yeah, we had singing, too. and the jewish, we learned only history the last years, but if i wanted to know how to govern, as a scottish, you know, i had to, we went to a private tutor, and twice a week. and it was private. we thought i speak yiddish, i write yiddish, i read a jewish paper, and i can govern. and from school, we learned only history. it was a beautiful, i had a beautiful childhood. my parents were very nice. we've been dressed always nicely, all of us. it was a nice living. but then, when i became, when i was 14 years old, i was one year at home. my mother brought me to a cousin of mine, and she, for an apprentice of dressmaking, the most respected profession was for a girl to be a dressmaker, or an embroider, you know, embroidering things, everything. so i went to my cousin. i was one year as an apprentice, and after one year, i got five dollars, five zotties a week, which was a fortune. my father always used to say, money's old, spend it. don't let the money get old, spend it. five dollars. but i learned really quick. when the war broke out, i was still a young girl, and my father, that's what i want to tell you, my father had a beautiful tailor shop. and after the war, when the war, we've been, we've been five days after the war broke out. are you able to describe your home? we lived two beautiful rooms in a kitchen. my father had a shop right in, and come again to the kitchen. and it was beautiful. our floors were red, shining. my mother was always cleaning. when i got older, i was helping her, because it was too much, i saw how much she was. the boys went home from today's work, you know, which they worked in the shop. and then my mother started to clean the shop. they came in the morning, everything was white, clean. they said, what did you do? and in a few minutes, everything's going to be dirty again. so she said, but to my satisfaction, i know it's clean. my mother was very clean. did you have any pets? what? did you have any pets? yes, we had a dog, and we had a canary. my father adored canaries. he always tell them, they sing, they sing, a beautiful, beautiful cage. nobody could clean that cage, only my father. and we had a dog, brillish, his name was brillish. what sort of dog was it? like a fox terrier, something like this. my mother had a very large family. there were seven kids, five daughters, and two sons. only one sister lived in england, which i have the picture of her. the rest, everybody lived in osaka. uncles, aunties, cousins, it was a pleasure, you know, cousins my age, cousins older my age. but it was just a pleasure to have all the family on shabbos. everybody comes to each other. can you tell me about your mother's sisters? the sisters? they were all housewives. all my uncles were lanka patties with little head to left. everybody very religious, orthodox. my aunties were wigs, and very religious. poland as a whole had a lot, a lot of jewish people, which were very religious. in fact, when they burned our shoe in ozyko, a lot of them even went home and got heart attacks and died. who was the rabbi of the... rabbi ber. ber. b-e-r. where did you learn hebrew and jewish studies? i don't speak any hebrew. i speak german, i speak polish, i speak yiddish, and i speak english. at home, we spoke between the parents, we talked yiddish, and between us children, polish. that was our livelihood. did you go to a heida? i'm telling you, twice a week to a private tutor, and he taught us. so was my sister. my brother went to heida, and the little one which perished eight years old. do you remember the tutor's name? who? yes, mr. erlich. a poor heidelum, a long beard, they had only one son. and we went there after school twice a week because it was too much, and poland has very severe winters. some winters you cannot even step out from the house. they had four seasons. some it was hot, scorching. the spring was nice. then the fall, the leaves started falling. and in the wintertime, a lot of times you couldn't step out from your house. so much snow, so much ice. the days in the wintertime are very short. three o'clock in the afternoon when you've been going home from school, especially hanukkah time. it was already dark. not pitch dark but sad to getting dark. it was a beautiful life. did you have any special cousins? yeah, all of them. in fact, one of my cousins, we met in auschwitz. she went links and i went dress. she went to the state of the guest room. what was her name? feike, fella feike. yes, she was maybe two years older than i. did you have any special friends at school? oh yes, it was a small city population, only 32,000. i say there were more jiduns than poles, but my sister, we talked in israel. she said no. but there were a lot of volksdeutsche. you know, the colon, the reichstorch means the one which is born in germany. and the volksdeutsche is the one which lived in all of poland and other countries. and we had a lot, a lot of folks search. before the war, we knew the germans, but you didn't know because they were poles. but when the war broke out, every german was a german. to hit the yid was a mitzvah. the war broke out, i'll never forget, in 1939 on a friday morning, i was staying and shaking the rocks on our balcony. a lady, a neighbor, comes running. that means in yiddish, war. no, that friday. the next friday the germans were at our steps. the germans were staying at the, where i lived was the main street. and the germans were staying already with the jeeps and the shirts half down, shaving themselves in the air. not on the road, just in the, in the, in the, in the, in the boulevard. and i had a little, about eight years old, and the little cousin, they both went out and they looked, the soldiers, how they dressed and how they, they washing themselves. it was september, it wasn't still so-called. and one soldier said to the kids, first piece to you that against yourself. that means if you were a yid, you go like that. and the little boys came home and my auntie and my mother, they thought, oh, he said, don't, don't talk about it. this was azukov. did you experience any other forms of antisemitism when you were at school? no. at school, the last years started, probably antisemitic. they had, before jewish shops, they had, they've been working with, with signs, don't buy from a jew. and school started really rough because on saturday we didn't go to school, the jewish girls. so we needed to, lesson to have anchovies when they go and come from school. they start playing dirty. they didn't want to give us the assignment. but my mother said to me, there is no such things. bribe them. bribe them. so we stayed before the school with a piece of cake from shabbos and they gave us the assignment. they gave maybe the two jewish girls. then we passed on and we made a lesson. yeah, that's what they did. azukov was a very nice city, was a textile city. people... did your parents or family experience antisemitism? no, not, not yet. but maybe if we were a little bit longer, we would. no, not yet. the only thing was that they didn't, the school was something which we had to do. but when i finished school in that shabtsevich building, they had built a beautiful new school for girls with old facilities, you know, inside plumbing. i was the last, even the last ones to evacuate that school. and, but i didn't go to the white school. my sister did. how did your father react to the jews being forbidden to keep their shops open? my father, and shabbos, no jewish head-opening of the shop in shabbos. no, when they were saying you should not keep your shops open during the week. or they were saying with signs, don't buy from a jew. and a lot of poles believed it and they did. and a lot of them didn't, see. what was the relationship like between the gentiles and the jews? ninety percent of my father's customers were, were poles. we didn't feel it. not yet. but maybe a few years later, poland will be anti-semitic enough. did you have any non-jewish friends? no. we also covers a small city. and now i'm coming to my teenage years. when i finished school, we had, we belonged to an organization called maccabi. this was a strictly jewish organization. we had a very beautiful, beautiful big hall. we came and get in the evenings and shabbos. and every shabbos night, there was an orchestra and there were dances. i was everyone of them, i can tell you. and it was beautiful. i, we, everybody knew everybody. it was a small city. when on shabbos we got together, a bunch of teenagers, we walked to a forest. it was a forest not far. but it was pretty far to a, but we didn't even realize that we are coming, that we walk. we sang, we tell jokes, boys and girls together. we came into the forest. we sat down and we sang up a storm. it was a beautiful, primitive life. we didn't have any washing machines, didn't have any vacuums, didn't have any vacuums.