today is february the 18th 1996. i am interviewing blummer domen. her maiden name is stoch. my name is rayleigh in braesk. i am conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. look so good. the maiden. my name is rayleigh in braesk. i am interviewing blummer domen. her maiden name is stoch. today is the 18th of february 1996. i am conducting this interview in johannesburg, south africa, in english. my name? my name? my name? i am in england. i am in england. i am in england. what is your full name? blummer domen. can you spell it? blummer v-l-u-m-a. blummer v-l-u-m-a. blummer v-l-u-m-a. what was your name at birth? a witch stoch. a set. t-o-i-c-h. did you have any other name? no. never. did you have any other sernines? no. yes, it was changed in america because originally our name was domen kevich. when we became citizens of the united states, you shot in it to domen. can you spell domen kevich? d-o-m-a-n-k-i-e-w-s-i-c-z. when were you born at the 28th of january 1920? what is your age now? 76. 86. where were you born? and poland in a small city named azarkov. can you spell that for me? o-z. you have a little here. o-z-r-k-i-w-i-c-z. o-z-r-c-r-s-i-c-z. do you remember your retreat? yes, 29th, a lay-puses-gago in o-z-c-f. what were your parents' names? my mother's name was beyla. my father's name was moshe. did you have any brothers or sisters? yes, i did. we've been a family of four children, two brothers and two sisters. what were your brothers' names? the brothers' name is aria. you lived in los angeles. my sister lives in los angeles, helen. one little brother perished in 19. before we went in together, he took away. he was eight years old. can you tell me how your parents earned a living? a very nice living. my father was a very good tailor to best in the city. and we lived a very nice life in poland. how did he earn his money? he really had a tailor shop, was a tailor. a shop making so-and-for their life from the old light in ozacop. they were my father's customers. i had to know his shop. my father was... so what the... and your mother? my mother was a housewife. he made his name as moskovich. a very good-looking lady. and so was my father. they were very devoted couple and very devoted parents. like i said, my father made a very good living. he was a councilman in ozacop, zarkov, in city hall. all the light from this zarkov were my father's customers. the best tailor in the city. my parents were very youthful, devoted to each other. we were going to all places where it was just something for dance or to play. we always been there. and my mother was a very good cook, a baker, and above all, the best mother and clean. our house was so clean, we could eat from the floor. everybody knew. my mother was so in my father. they called in ozacop, the tall bale. did they belong to any organizer? oh, yes. my father was a councilman. i'm not ready in the city hall. then he was, he formed, he loved music. so he formed a band from old jewish boys. and every sunday they walked in the alley and the avenues, and they played the jewish musical, musical orchestra. my father was the president of the organization. and he founded, when they played every sunday. my father, right in front, with white shoes, white pants, and navy alpaca jacket. it was very sharp, classic. the orchestra had only hats. they didn't have a new uniform. just hats. so was my father. they loved to dance. they loved to go play suits. and when i did all that, they took me along. my father belonged to all of the records. he was running the laborer. the labor union from the retailers. and they were meetings in our hearts. religion are very beautiful, flat. and my father has a sharp day. i've been going. when in poland, you start going to school. seven. seven years. can you tell me about your grandparents? yes. my mother's parents, my mother did hardly knew. but my father, i remember very distinctly my grandparents, because every piece of my mother, beik cakes, they lived nearby a city called lancitsa. today i was, again, a university city. all the high school and elementary students were attending in lancits. my father used to take me to my grandparents. every piece of my mother begged a lot of cakes. and i went home with my father. i don't think that's my sister, but i remember them. i was the oldest, and stuck in my mind. my grandfather owned a fish shop. when i knew him, it was a red retired. i eat with a long cup of thyme, which i usually share to the university with the fun today. and when i came there was a life of the party. my father was davening for the prisoners. the lintches for the prison. the other couple didn't have a prison. so, and they were fugitives, they were sitting in lancits. so, that another rise nearby. can you tell? what lintches? lancits. and i went home always with my father. and i trained. the train was going so slow that you could work. great, quick, yet. but we went home. my say there was davening for the fugitives in the jail. every shabbis, in every holiday, you went over there to daven with the jewish boys. they were not killers. just for maybe texting, evasion, or maybe they... it stole something. it was crime in poland for very, very low. very low. and after i visited my grandparents, we went home. we wanted to say about my childhood. i was seven years old. i started first grade. that's the mandatory age. now, age to come to school. you have seven grades. so, for ten years old, you come to art from school. what is the name of school? subshavage. for the big private building. subshavage. the first class of school was moved. the moved there were two schools only. one for boys. one for girls. the day there was no... i go here. everybody went to the same school. a public school. a public school. when you finish at 14, you observe a lot in that school. we took biology, geography, met, compositions, history. even jewish history took. not too close to the world. but we had... we only knew jewish history. they learned to govern and to write the history. the history paper was very common in the other countries. i have a jewish paper. so, when i finished school, i was 14 years old. i had seven grades. a lot of observing. i was very good in school. whenever i looked at composition, i was teaching a blooded back. i had always a five. i had to stay in front of the school and read it. i was very good in singing. he had singing too. and the jewish... we learned only history the last years. but if i wanted to know how to govern, it was a serious tradition. i had to... we went to a private studio. and to twice a week. and there was private. we thought i speak english. i read english. i read a jewish paper. and i came down. and from school, we learned only history. it was a beautiful... i had a beautiful childhood. my parents were very nice. you've been just always nicely over us. it was a nice living. but then when i became... when i was 14 years old, i was one year at home. my mother brought me to a cousin of mine. and she... for a apprentice of death making. the most respected profession was for a guilt to be a death making. all i'm very young. i'm very young. i think everything. so i went to my cousin. i was one year as apprentice. and after one year, i got five dollars, five lotties a week, which was a fortune. my father was used to say, money's old, spend it. don't let the money get old, spend it. five jobs. but i learned really quick. when the world was cut, i was still a young girl. and now my father... that's what the one tells you. my father had a beautiful, beautiful, tiny shop. and after the world, when the world... we didn't... five days after the world was cut. are you able to describe your home? yes. we lived two beautiful rooms in a kitchen. my father had a shop right there and come again to the kitchen. and it was beautiful. i was lost. we had had shining. my mother was always cleaning. when i... all of the... i was helping her because it was so much. i saw how much you were. the boys went home from... the days worked, you know, which they were working shop. and then my mother started to clean the shop. they came in the morning. everything was white, clean. they said, what did you do? and a few minutes, everything's going to be dirty again. so she said, but to my satisfaction, i know it's clean. my mother was very clean. did you hear any pace? yes. did you have any pace? yes, we had a dog. and we had a canary. my father and dog canaries. he's always telling him, play, sing, they sang a beautiful, beautiful cage. nobody could clean that cage only my father. and we had a dog, british. it's never as british. i thought i'd talk with her. i liked a fox tariest, something like this. my mother had a very large family. there were seven kids, five daughters, and two sons. only one sister lived in england, which i have the picture of her. there is everybody lived in osaka. oncles, time is anti-cousins. it was a pleasure, you know? cousins my age, cousins all the my age, but it was just a pleasure to have all the family on sharpies. everybody comes to each other. so can you tell me about your mother's sisters? they were all her housewives. all my own kids were lanka parties, with little head to left. all everybody, very religious are the dogs. my aunties were wigs. and very religious. poland as a whole had a lot of jews. people, it's very religious. in fact, when they went, i was soon in osaka, a lot of furmen, when tommy got out of the text and died. yes. what's the weapon of me? is that my bed? bed. p-e-r. where did you learn hebrew? i don't speak any. i don't speak any hebrew. i speak german. i speak polish. i speak english. i speak english. the at home, we spoke between the parents, we talked english. and between us children, polish. that's for our livelihood. then... did you grab your hider? i'm telling you twice a week to our private tutor. and we taught us, serve as my sister. my brother went to hader. and the little one, which perished eight years old. do you remember the tutor's name? who? yes. mr. ehrlich. i... i... i... puyidilum. the long beard. there had only one son. and we were going there. after school twice a week, because it was too much. and poland has very severe winters. some winters you cannot even step out on the house. they have four seasons. some of us had sculpture. if... if... you know, the spring was nice. then the fall, the leaves start falling, and the winter time, a lot of times you couldn't step out on the house. some had snow, some had chest. these days in the winter time are very short, three o'clock in the afternoon, when you've been told half of school, especially from a catwalk. there was already dark. not pitch dark, but sad to getting dark. it was a beautiful life. did you have any special cousins? yeah. yeah, all of them. in fact, one of my cousins, we met in auschwitz. she went... lynx and i went rest. she went to do a set of the guests. what does she say? fica. fica. fica. yes. she felt maybe two years older than i. did you have any special friends at school? oh, yes. it was a small city population, only 32,000. there were... i say there were more yeads and poles, but my sister, we talked. in this year, she said no. but there were a lot of folk search. you know, the... the common... the right search means the one which is born in germany. and the folk search is the one which lived in the old living, the poland and other countries. and we had a lot, a lot of folk search. before the war, we knew the germans, but we didn't know because they were poles. but when the world occurred, every german was a german. to hit the heat for the amids. the war broke out. i never forget in 1939, i was fighting the monarch. i was staying and shaking the rocks and i was balcony. a lady and a big comes running. that means in the world. no, that's friday. the next friday the germans were at our steps. the germans were staying at the valley for the main street, a lay of pieces of cake. and the germans were staying at the... with the jeeps and the chits have done, they're shaving themselves in the... not in the world, just in the... and the will of it. and i had the little... the eight years old and the little cousin. they both were not. they looked to soldiers, how they dressed and how they... they washing themselves for september. it was in still so cold. and i once told you said to the kids, first piece to you that i guess to so. that means if you were at a heat, you go like that. and the little boys came home and my auntie and my mother's daughter said, don't talk about this. this was a good one. did you experience any other forms of anti-semitism when you were at school? no, at school, the last years started for the... anti-semitic. they had before jewish shops, they had been working with signs, done by from a jew. and the school started really rough, because on saturday, we didn't go to school, the jewish girls. so you needed to listen to heaven's shabbis when they came home from school. they started playing debt, they didn't want to give us the assignment. but my mother said to me, there is no such thing, provide them. bribe them. so we stayed before the school with a piece of cake from shabbis and they gave us the assignment. they gave me the two jewish girls. then we passed on and we made a license. yeah, that's what they were. as a cover was a very nice city, was a textiles city. the people. the people. parents, family, experience, anti-semitism. no, not yet. but maybe if it was with longer, with with wood. no, not yet. the only thing was that they did in the school was something which we had to do. but when i finished school and that shabbis building, they had built a beautiful new school for girls. with all facilities, inside plumbing, i was the last, even the last ones, to evacuate at school. and that i didn't go to the white school. my sister did. how did your father react to jews being forbidden to keep the shops open? my father and shabbis no, two of you had opened up the shop in shabbis. no, when they were saying you should not keep your shops open during the week. oh, they were saying with signs done by from a jew. and a lot of poles believed it and they did. and a lot of them didn't. see? what was the relationship like between the jane tiles and the jews? 90% of my father's customers were poles. we didn't feel it, not yet. but maybe a few years later, poland would be and to submit again enough. did you have any non-jewish friends? no. with other covers, a small city and now i'm coming to my teenage years. when i finished school, we had the long-term conversation called my county. this was a certain jewish organization. i had a very beautiful big home. we can't get in the evenings and shabbis. and every shabbis night, there was an orchestra and they were dances. i was to everyone that you tell you. and it was beautiful. we, everybody knew everybody for this small city. when on shabbis, we got together a bunch of teenagers. we walked to our forest. it was a forest, not far. but it was pretty far to work. but we didn't even realize that we are coming. that we work. we sang with tell jokes, boys and girls together. we came in today. forest, we sat down and we sang up a storm. it was a beautiful, primitive life. we didn't have any washing machines. didn't have any vacuums. didn't have any vacuums. didn't have any vacuums.