Okay, minute. Clap for the purpose of saving the to and then you can start out. Can you introduce yourself and tell us a little bit about you? Sure, my name is cavalleirofession sarcler at l c and la superstition en were you born august sein Nine. Where are you born? Mars, what is your name at Birth? My name at Birth was banduceski. How do you spell your name? U-S-H-I-N-S Kamy last name describe your life in your hometown and neighborhood before you became a professional soc olar pretty much. It was a great time, a lot of us plan sokal of fini my friends on the street of Marsas a great time I didn't do much other stuff has grown ask Edme describe your childhood. My childhood was good at Loving parents had six sibling. So we have a lot of fun together. My grand parents also spend a lot of time on my grand parents to fondation Mars est to do as a kid and I got time. It was life like for you as a child well, as I said i just place accimatatime on Mars. I didn't do much, buter than that I walked around that the different space stations that were on Mars those re fasting enemy. You know as a child. I just I guess he maintained that he was sock ington checked out those passations and also is spent a lot time, just staring into the universe. Good. What was your daily routine as a child? The rutina a child. I wake up rally round, M. Marc. Stander time. We have breakfast and head out to head out to school, se spencerterencome back for lunch. Come back, come for lunch and in the afternoon ou a soc it after that home had dinner and this relaxer happier favorite memory from your childhood happier favorite memory. The best rememore was probably when I thought cifsmanage to survive at that was really fun that wasn't really fun but it was my fave remember because the throw of un on cuve waswas really fun and I think and really just take my memory. I think that's a movable cart of my child. What kind of a child were you? I was smart, discipline and also just masterton fraser who is in your family? My family was my parents, my sibling, my grand parents and also or the family dog with the name of Mark. What was your family? Like before you became a professional soco sis the loving family and bea tamines nothing special badet. And I don't think becoming professional star clear change anasofia. What were your parents names? My parents name, my dads name is Michael, my com's name is Ashley describe your parents. Oh, my dad is a very serious man doesn't talk much. You get things done and I have a respect for him. My mom she's a lovely woman. She looks after my massives a lot of her time to the family. What did your father family do for a living. Before you became a professional si? Well, my father was a basket baller. My mom was a film producer. What was your father like my father was cyrus man amazing a basket ball can really come even even oasisixty priest mabondani basket albus a serious man and doesn't like to Joke Around. What is your mother like my mom is very caring really takes tas and she loves think of everyone roth ewald. You remember about your extended family stefamily vision remember much about them. Obvious ly group agronome mars mystadefamily they were still back on the earth. So have contact. Did you have brothers or sisters? Three three sisters? What were the names of your sibling name is my sibling. My brothers fred at my ondes fred? It was Ken and Omar. My sisters Maria Allice and my youn gest sister. Her name is belle. What was your relationship like with your sub lins pretty good a lot of fun together. A lot of is from my brothers. But we look out to each other describe your family home. I found my home standard House or Mars. No much ende except for the basic necessite living on Mars tough you don't get a lot of stuff that you get on earth. We don't have like many families. We don't have a back yard. We do have area in the house to plan professional here. And there is a a time. There lalala Standard House space stations. What languages. Did you speak as a child at home? I spoke the language marc spoke english, swahili andry chanter. What was your family's religious itenpybefore your professional? Soccer play. What did your religion mean to is the child as I said no. Not really. Did you have a favorite festival or holiday when you are growing up? I really love the Independence day of Mars. We do crisisoft dad used to just take a spacious coldthe sources coton the university coarctata was pretty much that's. Well, how did your family practice their faith before I became a professional sangerplayer not much. Well, well, your friends lake before a professional sankerplayer my friends were. How can I say? Cris stuff had a eligerelationship with a basically plans are together onesta mars other than that we also the lot of crisi roud had done a very wild. Ou the boys. What happened to your friends from before your professio am still in contact with mosovitesondi past away on admission resinisation outimeline together bobos school like when you were younger school was school isa funjustin anyone school strict school. We have to really stick home teacher and ilosone health grade. So didn't really got to do much christof school school. The good memory. Did you do well in school? It okay. I got sabes. What were your favorite things to do as a child procesan nap? Howareyou like to tak anap ou the day what were your favorite sports or games to play when you were a la sarcelle baseball and parce ling. And now I also had lotoplay paul a cross. What was your favorite food as a child? What is your favorite food memory from Childhood? Wellin, those big peter with pinale papon perp essi Happy. What music did you like? When you were? A Kaye Drake? Justin bieber a few artis on Mars. One of his name is Walaluku music. Do you have any patron child? Our family bad mark. Were you ever Bolide as a child that really enfilait was always the bibliomer incisions how old were you? When you became a professional sorcellerie got my first contraction. Sixty years old. How long are you with that team? I mean. I play for the academy system. The years including academy time and also a time there thinkpol ten years. How long are you at your next team? Nex team for three seasons. We can go through all these toisi esme repeat after me for entrance. Okay. And what's to eat in twice seattle? You up good montâmes do Jacksons, gon tsa something and you're gonna repeated. And then give it like a three to five 2ᵈ count and then repeated agon and hell live into the nex one. These are for like intro. She's going to say. Hi. You'll say? Hi. She says rabais osa raswaelloello. Hello. Hi. Hi. Hi. Hello. How are you? How are you? Hello, how are you? Hi? How are you? Hi? How are you? Hi? How are you? How are you? How are you? How are you? I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine. How are you? I'm fine, how are you? I'm fine. Thank you. I'm fine. Thank you. I'm fine. Thank you. I'm fine. Thank you. I'm fine. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. For being here. Thank you. For being here. Thank you. For being here. Thank you. For sharing. Thank you. For sharing. Thank you. For sharing. Thank you. For listening. Thank you. For lison. Thank you. For listen. It's been my pleasure. Thank you. For asking your questions. Itsme my pleasure. Thank you. For asking your questions. It's me my pleasure. Thank you. For asking your questions. Good morning, good morning. Good morning. Good buy. Good by by. Good day, good day, good day. I hope you visit again. I hope you visit again. I hope you visit again. I hope you porn something from your visit today. I hope you warn something from a visit today. I hope you are some from a visit today welcome, waka, welcome, institution, welcome to us. Welcome, welcome to. Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me a question? Would you like to ask me question? Please? Go head ask please ask please go. And ask you can ask me any question? You like you can ask me any question? Like you can ask me any question? Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me? Do you have any questions for me. My name is my name is Sasayusing Cavin for the center. My name is Kevin and I am here to danser your questions. My name is Kevin aerts postions my name is Kevin Rtsport my name is Kevin my name is Cavin my name is Cavin my name is Cavin and I am professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer player. My name is Kevin and I am a professional soccer play. This is the same concept repeats after me. Let's, come back to that. Okay. Let's do zero section wiki pagan and soccer is the subject s. Let's do post soccerman do. What was it like to return home after your stocker career ended defini speretiel having played for such a long time to on my life home after time feel there's a lot of anti necessitent now what to do and just waking up in the middle night and not now what can happen to more? I definitely wouldn't say it's great as a great feeling fin comonotone after your career ended? How did you start over with nothing? I took up a job as as an electrical engineer or marsan space stations just started off from scrach learning from six just tranotrano my life something how did you rebel your life? I first started off as a electro ville engineer electriciens. And then I join the mob on the Mars. I didn't have much other choice. I was looking for something turning life so I just tried star live as a nobody in the mob and sport my way up from finitioaitest bastonnant myway were you able to ever recover any of your possessions from your childhood. I will be Harth Ern. There not much is there any item that you mess from when you were growing up. Yes. A Okay friend game y tane tal for me. But the last somewhere I was been looking for how is seeing your family after that of your career as emotional ou seether all Mars te can go wash play but returning to my family is josette mots had a good time to who took care of view after your career ended myself what do you remember from right in your career? I just remember playing my last game and having good by to the fans in the stadium was stuffed emotional as a lot of looter. It after Dad. It was realjustice. Le nettling practice acidelampe recreation ally. When did you come to earth? I came to earth we was thirty years old when I joined a ce. Why did you come to earth to place a osmose opportunity are there other earth was the close estate fafiec professional. What was your experience? Like coming to earth from Mars? A longer three weeks or so space ship a lot of turbulence here and there alsogatack by benamara ademeit was fond. We had a nice conversation with them. So they decided to take a sein fous the journey itself was the story what language barriers did you have on earth? And how did you overcome them? I spoke a lot languages? I always found myself to be smart languages? I can take new language. First rac a language languis bury. And also think sports is a universal language. Or how did you learn these different languages? I learn by using a olmo ford talking to people? What votations did you have about earth? I expected to be a bufpichohis? I expected a lot of stress. A lot of stress? That is a need to be there outside having stressaaaaaant life. This fini tistes wasaiba the exploitation co. Did you go through an orientation before after you settled on earth? Yeah. I join cadmeta lifelike on earth. How to do it enfantins? How to use apple pow? How to check emails as how to use a ernetas the host community on earth? Welcoming, yeah. Really. Welcome is really tokyo ordonnance to help you. What surprise you? The most about living on earth man? Just diamant oxygen that's on earth crazy much oxygen to breath in I and took me a ge used to that. And also just talking people saying hi, harry dons used to that abu taha. Sheinhappyer favorite more about living on earth? God of memories memories. Mecamarier will be my first game thalaprofessional toris rent. Did you experience faculties of dating to earth a lot as I said dating to how people in Iraq with each other here tasting to really hastings work using diver tors using my form phonesoap tu pressashgate disappointments si you have about earth climat, people think there's a logo on on earth everyday politics. I just feel like we don't have to live life. That's like that what's happen? Where do you live? Now, i live in I Mars. I bout myself nice house in in Marseille? Calle lice place fantastic view the ligar. Did you continue your education after your soccercoreer indhischool? Did you school Iischool? What was your career? My career was just play? Soccer? Kick sakaball for clubs paye money to do that? And I played for people who would pay money to come? Watch me and my hingis play? Did you like your career? Yeah. Under percent everythingxends painful and napomoci. What is your happinest? Memory after your soccer curen dera on a first god induced into the mall? Happy because I minafin fontecommunity to takeisha. Are you married? Bats bas here. Thank you. Guys cavantisfaces good. Job. Le wantaswop end esto minutes. Yourself you guys. Take a break for some water try stamina.