Alright, I'm gonna try to this time. Okay. Can you introduce yourself? Sure. Hi, I'm Jacqueline Maring and I am a professional chef.
When and where were you born? I was born in London in 2002. What was your name of birth? My name was Jacqueline Marring at birth. And how do you spell that name?
My first name is spelled J-A-C-L-Y-N. So a little bit differently than most Jaff loans.
Describe life in your hometown before you became a professional chef. Life was great. I am an only child, but I always knew that I loved cooking, mostly because I loved trying new foods, so I loved eating different things, so it inspired me to cook them. Describe your childhood. My childhood was very eventful.
I tried all sorts of different hobbies, I tried all sorts of different sports, everything that you might expect a kid to try. But most kids were not into cooking like me, but I decided that I enjoyed it. What was your daily routine, if there is one? As a child? As a child, I mostly went to school every day, so I would get up and get ready for school.
I would go to school when I come home, that would be my free time. So I would play outside or I would play around with some cooking on the weekends. That was when I really like to cook and use my family. Sure. A happy or favorite memory from my childhood?
My favorite memory from my childhood was when I first baked chocolate chip cookies. Well, because I tried so many times and I wasn't very good when I first started, but I remember when I finally made the best batch of chocolate chip cookies. I was so proud of myself and I was really young too, so it's nice to see how far I've come from that moment. What kind of a child were you? I was an intellectual and very humble.
Also. I loved school, I loved reading, I just loved filling my time with all sorts of interesting things. Who was your family? I just had my two parents and then I was an only child. What were your parents'names?
My mom was Julie and my dad was Jason. Would you describe your parents? Yes, I had great parents. They're very overprotective parents, but they were also very supportive of my dreams to cook, and I was inspired by them. What did your father or family do for a living before you became a chef?
Both of them were also chefs, so I learned from the best and they were the ones who first taught me when I was younger. What do you remember about your extended family? Both my parents were also only children, so I had no siblings, no cousins. It was just me and the food, so I had a very deep relationship with the food. What languages did you speak as a child at home?
English. That is all I didn't know.
Was your family's religious identity before you became a chef? We didn't have a specific religion, so I guess you could say we were atheist, but we were so devoted to our hobby of cooking. It was like a religion to us in its own sense. So how did your family practice this fade before you became a chef? Cooking food is amazing.
I also loved going to the grocery store, seeing all the potential there for different dishes. It was very special. What were your friends like? I didn't have many friends, mostly because I think I was advanced for my age. I think I was thinking about bigger things and wanting to do bigger things with my life than the other kids around me.
So I'm kind of alone. Both. So what was school like before you became shows? Well, as I mentioned before, I'm incredibly smart, so school was a breeze for me. But I did really enjoy reading and going to school.
Did you do well in school? Yes.
What were your favorite sports or games to play when you were young? I'm not really much of an athlete, not very into sports, and I wasn't then. So as you can tell, I'm very focused on one thing, so I tried I dabbled in some other sports and hobbies, but none of them were ever for me. What music did you like when you were young? Classical.
I really like Beethoven. Did you have any pets when you were a child? No, I did not. Were you ever bullied or beat up as a child before? Yes, but I didn't let it bother me.
It was just everyone wish that they could beat me, so that was probably the root of the issue, but that didn't bother me.
You can skip that. Okay, let's keep it off.
You can talk about culinary school if you want to use that section. Yeah. Describe the moment you arrived at the culinary school. It was a great moment. I immediately knew that I belonged there, and it was how I knew that I was in the right place, and my career was headed in that direction, so I was very excited.
Was there a daily routine and what was that like in the school? Yes. Well, every day I would go to different classes. I would learn different cooking techniques, how to make different dishes, pretty much some basic ones that everyone who goes to culinary school learns but obviously did it better. And then there would also be time for me to explore and cook on my own.
What was the food like? The food was obviously fantastic. I learned how to make so many new, interesting things and came up with some recipes on my own. So, yeah, that's the one thing about being around amazing chefs, is you're always eating well. How did you leave the school and where did you go after that?
I graduated early because I was the best one there. And immediately after I had offers from a number of restaurants, michelin star restaurants. They wanted me to come cook for them. But I said, you know what? I'm on top.
I'm not going to help other people with me. I already have this success. I'm just going to keep building on it. So I opened my own restaurant with like, in the restaurant I opened in the restaurant was very chaotic initially because we were trying to get everything set up immediately. We got a lot of attention.
People did know my name, so we have a lot of people coming. But it just in the initial stages, it was very chaotic to get things up and running.
What were the word conditions like in the restaurant? Very glamorous. I would say state of the art everything. We spared no expense on this restaurant, so made sure everything was up.
What was the name of the restaurant? The name of the restaurant was the name of the restaurant was computer. How did you come up with that name? The way that I came up with this name was that computers were something that always fascinated me. I feel like they're so innovative and cutting edge.
And that was what I wanted to achieve through my food. It's not a name that you would expect from a restaurant. And I like that. I like doing things that people aren't going to expect.
What was it like to return home after your chef's career? I never went home. It's the thing I had achieved all these great things and I didn't want to leave it for a second. I just wanted to stay around and see how the restaurant that I started kept flourishing. Did you rebuild your life and how did you start over?
Well, then I had more time for just personal cooking. I say one never stops learning, especially in the kitchen. So although I had my restaurant run my own restaurant, I still was trying new things, perfecting things that I had done in the past. So my life goal and center still remains pretty much the same.
Who took care of you after your retirement? Myself. And did you go to another country or no, I stayed where I was. I couldn't bear to leave sight of my success.
What disappointments did you have about your site of success, if any? Very little. I was surrounded by people who knew my name. People would come up to me on the street. I love that.
I love the attention. So, yeah, I positioned myself perfectly to get that attention.
What challenges did you face over the years as a previously known chef? I would say besides the initial beginning of the restaurant where things are a little bit crazy, I have very few challenges. As we've established am an amazing chef, very competent. I know my stuff. I don't run into many issues.
How are you affected by your experience as a chef in life? I think it brought my life purpose in meeting. It was something I had discovered that I enjoyed since I was young. So to be able to pursue that for the rest of my life is something that I am thankful for, because I know not everyone has an opportunity.
Can you ask some questions about food? What kind of food do you cook with? What kind of food do you specialize in? Primarily dishes with zucchini. And then there's so much you can do with zucchini.
I feel like it personally is really underrated. So I love working with zucchini. I work across different cuisines with my favorite vegetable. How would your career have been if cuisine never existed? If zucchini never existed?
I honestly don't know what I'd do. I mean, maybe squash. Maybe I'd work with swash instead. The board families.
What is the most difficult part of cooking, do you think? For me, the most difficult part of cooking is the fact that you can put hours and hours into a dish, but then everyone loves it so much, and it's so delicious that it's gone in a couple of minutes. I guess that is a good thing, because it means that what I've made is just so perfect and amazing, but it's all consumed in a matter of seconds.
I don't think these questions are related.
How do your customers describe you? As it shows? I think my customers come to my restaurant because they've heard about me. They want to experience what they've heard. I think they're in awe of me, which, like, as they should be, rightfully so.
Yeah, I would say that I think people come to my restaurant, computer for an experience. This isn't just a regular Tuesday night. This is your anniversary, your birthday, this is your wedding. Like, this is a huge deal, and that's what people get when they come to my restaurant. Throughout the years, have you had any customer that you particularly remember?
I would say the Queen of England. She was a close friend. She would come to a restaurant often. That was probably my favorite person to cook for. What was the Queen's favorite dish?
She liked very much?
Fried zucchini. That was her favorite. One of my personal favorites as well. And is the Queen's family also a customer of your restaurant? Yes, but I don't like them as much.
I want to talk about computer again.
What's the vibe like in a computer? What is the viblag in computer? Computer, as I've mentioned before, is an experience. You come into the restaurant, and you are greeted by decor like you've never seen. It's very futuristic, yet also timeless.
It's impossible to describe. You have to see it for yourself. But computer is there's just nothing like it anywhere else.
Let's call it there.
I think you guys have careers in acting.
